 BROOKINGS

A NEW DIRECTION FOR
STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD:
PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

Center for Universal Education

at BROOKINGS

A NEW DIRECTION FOR
STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD:
PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

Mary Burns is an independent research consultant for the Center for Universal Education, Global Economy
and Development program, Brookings Institution

Rebecca Winthrop is a Senior Fellow and the Director at the Center for Universal Education, Global
Economy and Development program, Brookings Institution

Natasha Luther is a Senior Research Analyst at the Center for Universal Education, Global Economy and
Development program, Brookings Institution

Emma Venetis is a Senior Research Analyst at the Center for Universal Education, Global Economy and
Development program, Brookings Institution

Rida Karim is a college student and Communications Coordinator for the National Student Board Member
Association
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank all our steering committee members, resource experts, study participants, and
others who contributed to this research. We are deeply grateful for their time, insights, and generosity and
without them this report would not have been possible. Please see Annex B for our full acknowledgements.

We are grateful to Ashleigh Ekwenugo, Mashhood Bhat, and Izzy Taylor for their contributions to
this report. We are also grateful to our reviewers including Emily Morris, Punya Mishra, and Jennifer
O'Donoghue. Design was done by Marian Licheri Hougaard and Andreina Gonzalez Anzola.

The Brookings Institution is a nonprofit organization devoted to independent research and policy

solutions. Its mission is to conduct high-quality, independent research and based on that research, to
provide innovative, practical recommendations for policymakers and the public. The conclusions and
recommendations of any Brookings publication are solely those of its author(s), and do not reflect the
views or policies of the Institution, its management, its other scholars, or the funders acknowledged below.

Brookings gratefully acknowledges the support of EY and the Lego Foundation.

ABOUT THE CENTER FOR UNIVERSAL EDUCATION

The Center for Universal Education (CUE) is a leading policy center focused on universal quality education
and skills development around the world. CUE helps inform the development of policy related to global
education and promotes actionable strategies for governments, civil society, and private enterprise.

Throughout the drafting of this report, the authors used generative Al tools such as Anthropic's Claude,
Microsoft's Co-pilot, and OpenAl's ChatGPT. These tools were used, in limited cases, to summarize
research articles, locate sources, and condense and edit text. The outputs were reviewed and revised
for factual accuracy and checked for plagiarism by the authors prior to publication. The Al tools did not
contribute any original ideas to the report.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 3
Table of Contents

©

LIST OF ACRONYMS

FIGURES

BOXES

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

INTRODUCTION

This report: Its purpose and main message

Foundational premises of this report

Our methods: A premortem on Al and children's education
What is generative Al?

CONTEXT: Students are increasingly accessing Al outside of school, and families
continue to be on the front lines

Widespread Al use by children and youth
The blurred lines of children’s Al use
Families on the front lines

POTENTIAL OUTCOME 1: Al can enrich learning if well-designed and anchored in
sound pedagogy

Benefit 1: Al can improve equity by addressing educational resource gaps and
expanding access to education

Benefit 2: Al can optimize teacher time for greater focus on students

Benefit 3: Al can improve student learning

Benefit 4: Al can tailor learning to each student's needs

Benefit 5: Al can extend learning to neurodivergent students and students with
disabilities

Benefit 6: Al can advance assessment

POTENTIAL OUTCOME 2: Al can diminish learning if overused with no guardrails

Risk 1: Al can undermine students’ cognitive development

Risk 2: Al can impede students’ social and emotional development
Risk 3: Al can degrade trust in education

Risk 4: Al can threaten students’ safety

Risk 5: Al dependence can erode students’ autonomy and agency
Risk 6: Al can deepen equity divides

10

16
17
21
22
24

27
28
29
31

33

34
38
41
44

47
50

53
55
69
83
88
104
110

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
@) RISKS VERSUS BENEFITS: Currently, Al's risks overshadow its benefits 119
Al's benefits are numerous 119

But today, these benefits are overshadowed by risks 120

Advancing Al learning experiences that enrich, not diminish 120

Drivers of Al risks 123

The time to act is now 123

(“) IT'S NOT TOO LATE: Recommendations for mitigating risks and harnessing benefits 124
We all have a role to play 127

Prosper 128

Prepare 142

Protect 151

Conclusion: Navigating the crossroads 163

ENDNOTES 165
REFERENCES 166

ANNEX A: Example Al literacy frameworks 203

ANNEX B: Acknowledgements. 210

ANNEX C: Research methods 216

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 5
LIST OF ACRONYMS

AAC Augmentative and Alternative Communication
Al Artificial Intelligence

API Application Programming Interface

AR Augmented Reality

ASCD Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development
ASD Autism Spectrum Disorder

AUP Acceptable Use Policy

AWE Automated Written Evaluation

BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
BOT Build-Operate-Transfer model

CDT Center for Democracy & Technology

CFF Cognitive Forcing Functions

COPPA Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
CPRA California Privacy Rights Act

FERPA Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
GDC Global Digital Compact

GDPR General Data Protection Regulation

GPT Generative Pre-Trained Transformer

IFE Innovative Financing for Education

ISTE The International Society for Technology in Education
ITS Intelligent Tutoring System

L2 Second Language

LARF Let Al Read First

LLM Large Language Model

MAiLS Machine Agents in the Learning Scale

MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MMLU Massive Multitask Language Understanding
NOLAI Netherlands National Education Lab Al

OCR Optical Character Recognition

PPP Public-Private Partnership

RBD Regulation by Design

RBF Results-Based Financing

SLM Small Language Model

STEM Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
UK United Kingdom

UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization
U.S. United States

VR Virtual Reality
WEIRD Western, English-speaking, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic
XAl Explainable Artificial Intelligence

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
FIGURES

FIGURE 01: Potential benefits and risks of Al in education 19
FIGURE 02: Bending the arc from diminished to enriched Al learning experiences 20
FIGURE 03: Map of study participants’ countries 24
FIGURE 04: Children's Al use around the world 29
FIGURE 05: The blurred lines of children’s Al use 30
FIGURE 06: ChatGPT usage by month 31
FIGURE 07: Risks identified by study participants 54
FIGURE 08: Four modes of engagement 60
FIGURE 09: Depth of knowledge framework for writing 64
FIGURE 10: Human essays contribute more unique ideas than ChatGPT - generated essays 68
FIGURE 11: Children's data privacy not included 89
FIGURE 12: Data collection and usage summary of OpenAl's privacy policy as of August 15, 2025 92
FIGURE 13: OpenAl data policy: Data sharing and disclosure as of August 15, 2025 93
FIGURE 14: The Al continuum of dependence 106
FIGURE 15: The Al flywheel effect on children's learning and development 110
FIGURE 16: Rural versus urban Internet usage 113
FIGURE 17: Top 12 spoken versus online languages 115
FIGURE 18: The instructional core that drives educational change 121
FIGURE 19: Al enriched versus diminished learning experiences 122
FIGURE 20: A framework for action 126

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 7
BOXES

BOX 01: Data sources 23
BOX 02: Common sources for generative Al 24
BOX 03: Types of Al tools and platforms study participants commonly report using 26
BOX 04: Possible solutions for expanding access to Al in underserved areas 37
BOX 05: Time savings only occur if teacher workloads remain steady 40
BOX 06: Al and early childhood development 55
BOX 07: Reducing the tendency to offload thinking to Al 67
BOX 08: Seductive design: Banal deception, sycophancy, and anthropomorphization 71
BOX 09: Emerging safeguards for children in the age of Al 76
BOX 10: Building trust around Al 85
BOX 11: Privacy and safety for student Al 90
BOX 12: Small language models: Addressing safety concerns 100
BOX 13: Addressing students’ Al dependence 109
BOX 14: Data centers 114
BOX 15: Measuring the accuracy of LLMs 116
BOX 16: From policy to implementation: Addressing the Al divide 118
BOX 17: Strategies to support students’ core learning capacities 130
BOX 18: Strategies to support students’ knowledge and understanding, through interdisciplinary
frameworks 132
BOX 19: Strategies to support students’ social and civic development 133
BOX 20: Strategies to support students’ motivation and agency, including through real-world learning. 134
BOX 21: Teacher -tech co-design hubs 135
A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 8
BOX 22: Involving students and parents in Al decisionmaking and design 136
BOX 23: Local language and community Al initiatives 137
BOX 24: Child-friendly product design 138
BOX 25: Diverse research approaches to study Al and education 141
BOX 26: IFE for Al infrastructure 148
BOX 27: Strategies for equitable distribution of Al tools 150
BOX 28: Al safety standards for children 153
BOX 29: Strategies to stress test Al platforms for safety 154
BOX 30: Child-friendly procurement criteria 159
BOX 31: Product certifications 160
BOX 32: Family-facing Al safety information 162
BOX 33: Student led, peer-to-peer Al discussion 163
A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 9
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

INTRODUCTION

In November 2022, OpenAl released its frontier Large Language Model (LLM), ChatGPT. Within five days,
ChatGPT had five million users. Within two months, that number swelled to 100 million monthly active
users. By August 2025, 700 million users across the globe were using ChatGPT (Mehta 2025). Many of
those users are students harnessing LLMs for brainstorming, tutoring, creating, and learning; to work
better and faster; and, crucially, to outsource their thinking.

Since the debut of this most common form of generative artificial intelligence, referred to here as "Al," the
education community has been debating its promises and perils. Rather than wait for a decade to conduct
a postmortem on the failures and opportunities of Al, the Brookings Institution's Center for Universal
Education embarked on a yearlong global study-a premortem-on generative Al focused on answering the
following two research questions:

+ What are the potential negative risks that generative Al poses to the education of children and youth?
« Assuming these potential risks, what can we begin to do now to prevent them while maximizing the
potential benefits of Al?

This premortem encompassed interviews, focus groups, and consultations with 505 students, teachers,
parents, education leaders, and technologists across 50 countries. Our findings are based on their
experiences with Al, a close review of hundreds of studies, and a Delphi panel. Given the emergent nature
of the field and the need to shed light on how Al is being implemented in education, children's experiences
and those of the adults around them are the focal point. We share our insights not as the final word on Al
and education, but as a first vision of where we are already heading.

GOALS OF THIS REPORT

This report aims to help readers from many fields understand the current landscape of benefits and risks
of Al in children’s education and help them identify concrete actions they can take to leverage Al for
transformational educational benefits. Ultimately, the trajectory of Al will be determined not by fatalism
or passive acceptance, but by the deliberate choices and sustained efforts of all of us working together
to bend the arc of Al implementation toward educational experiences that help all children flourish
academically, socially, and civically.

FOUNDATIONAL PREMISES OF THIS REPORT
This report is grounded in three critical premises that shape our findings and recommendations.

First, a core premise of this study is that children’s learning is fueled by social relationships and their
holistic development (National Scientific Council on the Developing Child 2004). Decades of research

in developmental science demonstrates that children's ability to learn—including in formal schooling—is
shaped by the interconnected growth of their cognitive, social, and emotional capacities. These domains

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 10
are mutually reinforcing: language and executive-function skills support social interaction; emotional
regulation influences attention and persistence; social relationships fuel motivation and meaning-making.
Learning, therefore, cannot be separated from the broader developmental systems in which children grow
(Bronfenbrenner 1994; Immordino-Yang and Damasio 2007; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine et al. 2018). Hence, we have examined here the role of Al on children’s cognitive, social, and
emotional development both in and out of school, which includes their growing interaction with Al friends.

Second, schools serve multiple, interrelated purposes in children's lives and in society. While they are
widely understood as places for academic learning, they are also central spaces for social development,
personal growth, and learning how to live in a diverse community. In school, children learn to understand
others’ perspectives, collaborate, negotiate differences, and build the social and emotional skills needed
to participate in diverse communities. At the same time, schools are environments where children can
develop capacities that prepare them for future work, meaningful life pathways, and participation in civic
life. Schools can provide stability, routine, and care; support children’s well-being; and enable parents’
labor-force participation (Winthrop and McGivney 2015). Thus, we broadly examine Al in terms of the
role schools play in academic, developmental, social, civic, and economic roles — all of which are deeply
intertwined in children's everyday educational experiences.

Finally, technology has long been heralded as inherently “transforming” education—a means to overcome
existing constraints in the education system. The prevailing narrative suggests that the very adoption and
use of technology represent innovation and progress, with the implication that schools and students who
do not use these tools will suffer academically, vocationally, and personally. This same rhetoric now drives
the adoption and use of Al in schools (Reich 2025).

However, decades of investment and implementation have demonstrated that technology's educational
benefits have been mixed at best (UNESCO 2023). Multiple rigorous cross-national studies have shown
that education systems investing heavily in technology do not necessarily experience improved teaching
and learning outcomes (OECD 2015; West 2023). The mobile broadband example illustrates this pattern—
while Internet expansion correlates with economic development, a study of 2.5 million 15-year-olds from
82 countries suggests that the rollout of 3G coverage from 2000-2018 produced statistically significant
declines in math, reading, and science scores, as well as students’ social relationships and sense of
belonging (Jain and Stemper 2024). Rhetoric arguing that technology adoption in and of itself represents
innovation and progress is not only false but undermines society's ability to discern how to effectively
harness Al to advance children's education (Reich 2025).

Research indicates that technology contributes most effectively to educational improvement when
embedded within carefully designed and implemented strategies (Hardman et al. 2019). This requires
several conditions. Tools and platforms must be designed ethically and responsibly, grounded in the
learning sciences. Schools and families must work in partnership to ensure that children's Al use
supports—not harms—their learning and development. Al tools must support human relationships,
including the teacher-student relationship, using sound pedagogical practices designed to augment,
rather than substitute student learning. Finally, educators and students must remain aware of both the
benefits and harms these technologies present. When these conditions align, Al has the potential to
meaningfully enhance educational outcomes while minimizing risks to learners. This conceptual grounding
provides valuable guidance for understanding and discussing Al in educational contexts.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 11
THE CHALLENGE OF ANALYSIS

Analyzing a nascent and dynamic innovation like Al presents distinct challenges. The technology's rapid
evolution, its sui generis nature, and the absence of extensive precedents make establishing stable frames
of reference or accurate predictions of benefits or harms difficult. We are operating within a context

of scarcity of rigorous and longitudinal research evidence on the effects of Al in education on student
learning and well-being. None of us, not even Al's creators, can predict its potential dangers or benefits
with complete accuracy. While new developments will inevitably render some information in this report
moot by the time of publication, the data presented here remains acutely relevant for this critical juncture
in Al's development. Accepting uncertainty and incorporating it into our reasoning allows us to speak
wisely about what we observe and to better prepare educational environments for both the opportunities
and challenges that generative Al brings.

CURRENTLY, THE RISKS OF Al OVERSHADOW THE BENEFITS

Given the trajectory of Al's implementation and use at this point in time, this report identifies two
potential outcomes:

Potential outcome 1: Al-enriched learning experiences. In communities with access to Al, well-designed
Al tools and platforms can offer students a number of learning benefits if deployed as a part of an overall,
pedagogically sound approach. Al can also expand access to education for students who were previously
excluded from teaching and learning experiences. In schooling, Al enriches learning when it expands and
deepens the capabilities of—and interactions between—students, teachers, and content, which are at the
heart of education. Al tools explicitly designed to support the learning of children and youth, including
experiences bounded by accurate content and safety guardrails, can foster enriched learning experiences.

Potential outcome 2: Al-diminished learning experiences. In communities with regular access to Al,
overreliance on these tools and platforms can put children and youth's fundamental learning capacity

at risk. These risks can impact students’ capacity to learn, their social and emotional well-being,

their trusting relationships with teachers and peers, and their safety and privacy. Indiscriminate Al
implementation also risks exacerbating social divides. In schooling, Al diminishes learning when it restricts
and weakens the capabilities of—and interactions between—actors in the instructional core, namely
students, teachers, and content. Al tools designed for the general public, with limited safeguards and a
risk of inaccurate information, can lead to diminished learning experiences.

Ultimately, we find that at this point in its trajectory, the risks of utilizing Al in education overshadow
its benefits. This is largely because the risks of Al differ in nature from its benefits—that is, these risks
undermine children’s foundational development. For example, when trust between students and teachers
is diminished—a current risk of Al implementation—the benefits of Al-enriched teaching and learning
materials cannot be fully realized. Understanding the distinction between enriched and diminished
learning experiences is an important first step toward mitigating Al's risks and harnessing its benefits in
education.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 12
IT'S NOT TOO LATE: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION

Above all, this report is a call to action. While Al's potential negative risks and the damages it has already
caused are daunting, they are fixable. We should neither capitulate to these harms nor focus solely on
limiting their repercussions.

We urge all relevant actors to identify at least one

recommendation to advance over the next three years.

Instead, as the Section VI exhorts, governments, education funders, technology companies, education
systems, civil society organizations, educators, families, caregivers, community actors, researchers and

academics, and students have the agency, the capacity, and the imperative to enable students to harness

Al's academic, vocational, and personal benefits while simultaneously shielding them from its potential
risks and actual harms.

Thus, the final section of this report presents 12 recommendations for multiple stakeholders organized
around three foundational pillars that together form a comprehensive framework for action. We urge
all relevant actors to identify at least one recommendation to advance over the next three years.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

13
PyP

PREPARE PROTECT

PROSPER

PROSPER: Recommendations under the Prosper pillar focus on transforming teaching and learning
experiences so that children and youth can thrive in an education system where Al is omnipresent.
Students can prosper through carefully titrated Al use (knowing when to teach with and without Al,
using Al only when it enhances rather than replaces student effort and cognitive engagement), high-
quality pedagogical integration (combining Al with evidence-based practices that prioritize deeper
learning), and collaborative design and research (co-designing tools with educators and communities
while conducting rigorous research on when and how Al supports learning). These efforts will help
children and youth develop the capabilities they need to flourish in an Al-driven world.

PREPARE: Recommendations under the Prepare pillar focus on building the knowledge, capacity, and
structures needed for students, educators, families, and education systems to integrate Al ethically,
effectively, and humanely. The education community can prepare for a rapidly evolving Al-infused
world through holistic Al literacy (developing understanding about Al's capabilities, limitations, and
implications), robust professional development (equipping educators with knowledge and skills to
teach with and about Al), and systemic planning and access (establishing clear visions for ethical Al
use while expanding equitable access). These efforts will ensure that students, educators, families,
and education systems can navigate the world of Al with confidence and responsibility.

PROTECT: Recommendations under the Protect pillar include developing and implementing safeguards
on Al for student privacy, safety, emotional well-being, and cognitive and social development.
Students can be protected through ethical and trustworthy Al design (protections embedded into the
technology during the design phase), responsible governance (strong regulatory frameworks), and
adult guidance (modeling healthy technology use at home and in schools). These efforts will help
ensure that Al enhances learning while keeping children safe, supported, and able to thrive in an
Al-infused world.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 14
Alcan...

DEGRADE trust in education (Put student safety at risk) (Automate assessment)
Gar reading and writing skills ) Miedseh dem (-clanliem ( Undermine family bonds

(Power Intelligent Tutoring Systems) (Widen linguistic and cultural gaps )

(Enable cognitive offloading) IMPEDE social and emotional development

(Support student reading ) (increase surveillance of students)

OPTIMIZE teachers’ time (Expand socioeconomic and regional inequity)

(Support underserved and neurodivergent students ) (Encourage harmful behavior)

DEEPEN equity divides Y Alcan... ) EXPAND access

@isplace trust in humans) (Weaken critical thinking and creativity )

(Enhance assistive technologies )
(@amage teacher-student relationships) Gupport individualized attention )
(Exacerbate mental health concerns )
(Manipulate emotions ) (Undermine democracy and freedom)
(Help students with writing) (Share private student data) (Increase loneliness )
Gi children to sexualized content and harassment)

© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

“o +

_ INTRODUCTION

A new technology sometimes creates more than it destroys. Sometimes it destroys more than it
creates. But it is never one-sided.

— Neil Postman (1990)

What role will artificial intelligence (Al) play in shaping the future of education? Will it transform education,
or will it generate harms that undercut these gains? As educators contemplate integrating Al into teaching
and learning, how can they embrace its potential while preserving human agency, deep learning, and
pedagogical judgment? How can we navigate and manage the unexpected and unintended consequences
of the relationship between human cognition, institutional imperatives, and Al?

As the above questions imply, generative artificial intelligence (hereafter referred to in this report as "Al")
presents opportunities and threats, promising unprecedented innovation—and disruption. This duality
prompted the Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution to examine Al in relation to the
education of children and youth. This is a distinctly urgent global phenomenon: children—whom we define
as those under 18—access Al products regardless of national borders. And unlike the use of Al by adult
professionals, when children use Al, it affects their cognitive and emotional development.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 16
After OpenAl released ChatGPT, its frontier Large
Language Model (LLM), in November 2022,

Al began to shape how children learn on an
international scale. In crisis-affected communities
lacking traditional schools, children engage with
adaptive lessons through messaging platforms or
Al tutors. Children with speech and communication
challenges use Al to create digital versions of

their own voices in order to communicate with
classmates and teachers. Around the world,
children interact with robotic teacher assistants and
use Al-embedded Virtual Reality (VR) to immerse
students in real-world learning environments
(Chowdhury 2024; ANI News 2022).

Students’ Al use extends beyond school, blurring
the lines between entertainment, social connection,
and academic work. They talk to Al “friends” via
social media, confide in chatbots for emotional
support and relationship advice, and outsource
schoolwork to Al (and then employ Al humanizers to
disguise their Al-generated homework). For some
students, Al use is a lifeline to a larger world and a
fuller sense of self (Franze et al. 2023). For others,
it represents a dangerous slide toward dependence,
school withdrawal, social isolation, and, tragically
at times, self-harm (Common Sense Media 2025a;
Duffy 2024; Duffy 2025; McLennan 2025).

These examples suggest that concerns about

Al's duality and disruptive nature are not
unfounded. The impacts of new technologies

are often ecological in scope, affecting not one
thing but everything, including human behavior
(Postman 1995). Every technological advantage
yields corresponding, and often unforeseen,
disadvantages whose effects are spread unevenly
(Postman 1995; Kranzberg 1986). Social media
exemplifies this duality. Its verbal immediacy

and open, networked structure have fostered
unprecedented opportunities for human creativity,
communication, and collaboration (Burns and
Bodrogini 2011). Yet these same platforms serve as
vectors for social maladies, scaling misinformation,
amplifying polarization, and influencing users’
mental health (OECD 2021a; Twenge et al. 2021;

Haidt 2024). Financial incentives to maximize user
engagement often exacerbate these harms.

As this report will document, the adoption

and integration of Al tools presents a complex
landscape of educational benefits and risks,
disruption, and misalignment that are potentially
more consequential than those experienced with
social media. When employed inventively, new
technologies can be transformative. Adaptive

Al learning tools can personalize instruction
and enhance student agency; Al can reduce
administrative burdens on teachers, freeing
time for meaningful interaction; automated
tutoring can increase student motivation and
support differentiated learning. However, Al
tools can also prompt overreliance, emotional
and cognitive dependence, and diminished
critical thinking. This duality demands that
policymakers, decisionmakers, and educators
approach educational technology implementation
with a sophisticated understanding of both its
transformative potential and its inherent risks to
student well-being and learning.

Al stands as a remarkable testament to human
imagination and innovation; its tools and systems
embody human values and priorities, promising
enormous benefits to human beings (PBS: Firing
Line with Margaret Hoover 2025; Quezzaire 2025).
Its stakes for education are particularly high
because Al's influence will increasingly extend to
society's most vulnerable population—our children
and youth.

This report:
Its purpose and
main message

This report is designed to serve as a resource

for educational leaders, government officials,
technologists, school administrators, teacher and
family organizations, student networks, funders,
and other stakeholders responsible for developing

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 17
We worry that the larger education community may miss the forest
for the trees: A narrow focus on developing effective Al-supported
teaching approaches could obscure how students’ very ability to
learn is being undermined by Al overuse, inappropriate use, and
non-productive use, both in and, increasingly, outside the classroom.

and implementing Al in education. The focus is
squarely on Al and children and youth's educational
experiences, specifically on students attending
primary and secondary school.

The information presented here represents a
snapshot of Al experiences during the early stages
of its adoption, integration, and use in education,
both inside and outside the classroom. These
perspectives illuminate both the issues at stake and
the responses they provoke among practitioners
navigating this emerging landscape. Given the
rapidly changing nature of this field, they are by no
means definitive.

Our research identifies potential outcomes if

Al deployment continues on its current course.
Benefits include enriched learning experiences
through expanded access to education; improving
teaching and learning through personalized
instruction; providing multimodal ways of accessing
lessons; and allowing educators more time

with students.

Yet, as this report will show, these benefits
currently pale in comparison to the risks of Al.
For our study participants, these risks include
undermining children's cognitive, social, and
emotional development; reducing trust between
students, teachers, and families; threatening
study privacy; and opening a new Al equity divide.
We worry that the larger education community
may miss the forest for the trees: a narrow focus
on developing effective Al-supported teaching
approaches could obscure how students’ very

ability to learn is being undermined by Al overuse,
inappropriate use, and non-productive use, both
in and, increasingly, outside the classroom. The
qualitatively different nature of these risks—which
undermine the cognitive and social development
essential for successful teaching and learning—
demands that we establish frameworks to harness
Al's transformative potential with safeguards.

All technologies create both hoped-for benefits
and unanticipated negative consequences, often
disrupting systems in ways their developers never
imagined. Recognizing this dynamic allows us

to invert traditional discussions about Al from
such passive queries as, “What will Al do to us or
our future?” to active, agency-driven questions
like, “What will we do to create the educational
future we want for our children” and “How will we
control Al?” This reframing helps us understand
that Al's negative outcomes in education are

not predetermined. As human beings with
autonomy, we can approach Al use in education
with intentionality and discernment so that our
technological future does not resemble our
technological past.

To successfully bend the arc of Al implementation
toward improved student learning, we must
mitigate risks and harness benefits according

to three "pillars": prosper, protect, and prepare.
All three pillars must work in concert to shift Al's
course so that all children and youth may access
an education that helps them flourish as humans
in a technological world. We can utilize Al's power
to help children prosper educationally by using Al

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

18
FIGURE 1

Potential benefits and risks of Alin education

POTENTIAL BENEFITS

POTENTIAL RISK

Access
Al can improve equity by addressing educational
resource gaps and expanding access to education.

Cognitive development
Al can undermine students' cognitive development.

Time savings
Alcan optimize teacher time for
greater focus on students.

Social and emotional development
Alcan impede students' social and
emotional development.

Learning outcomes
Al can improve students' learning.

Trust
Al can degrade trust in education.

Personalization
Alcan tailor learning to each student's needs.

Safety
Alcan threaten students' safety.

Accessibility
Al can extend learning to neurodivergent
students and students with disabilities.

Dependence
Al dependence can erode students’
autonomy and agency.

Assessment
Al can advance assessment.

Inequality
Al can deepen equity divides.

© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

tools that embed research-proven instructional
design and learning sciences as part of pedagogies
that use Al to complement and strengthen, not
replace, human knowledge, skills, and judgment,
while avoiding Al deployment when it undermines
essential developmental processes such as self-
regulation, metacognitive development, or critical
student-teacher relationships (Cukurova 2024).

We can protect students’ privacy, safety, emotional
well-being, and cognitive and social development
by ensuring safe access to ethical and responsible
Al tools that support strong in-person relationships
and productive struggle. We can help educators,
families, and students prepare for Al by building
the knowledge, capacity, and structures needed

to integrate Al effectively, while reflecting on

the ethical implications and creative uses of Al

and the ways technology shapes our behavior,

our social interactions, and our relationship with
knowledge. Ultimately, our hope is that our findings
and recommendations help shift the course of

Al's progression so that all children and youth
everywhere may access learning that helps them
develop, grow, and thrive as human beings in an
Al-infused world.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 19
FIGURE 2

Bending the arc from diminished to enriched Al learning experiences

SHIFT NEEDED

™

AI-DIMINISHED Al-ENRICHED
LEARNING LEARNING
° Extending learning for
Disrupted social and neurodivergent students
emotional development ° \ 9 { ® and students with

\ 4 e bo
More student
dependence on Al e ° °
e ( |e

disabilities

Improved access
to education

eo—__ |_-—|__—@

Weakened cognitive /|
development

Decreased
student safety TTI

More tailored learning
to students’ needs

Improved
student learning

Deeper

equity divides

Saved
teacher time

ad ig
——
Reduced ~~ improved
trust assessment
an 7
elf -”
j&
ey eS
YE or
70, cNEY

y D
OF ALIN STUDENT LEARNING AND

DATA AND EVIDENCE

© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 20
Foundational
premises of
this report

This report is grounded in three critical premises
that shape our findings and recommendations.

First, a core premise of this study is that children’s
learning is fueled by social relationships and their
holistic development (National Scientific Council on
the Developing Child 2004). Decades of research in
developmental science demonstrates that children’s
ability to learn—including in formal schooling—is
shaped by the interconnected growth of their
cognitive, social, and emotional capacities. These
domains are mutually reinforcing: language and
executive-function skills support social interaction;
emotional regulation influences attention and
persistence; social relationships fuel motivation
and meaning-making. Learning, therefore, cannot
be separated from the broader developmental
systems in which children grow (Bronfenbrenner
1994; Immordino-Yang and Damasio 2007; National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
et al. 2018). Hence, we have examined here the role
of Al on children’s cognitive, social, and emotional
development both in and out of school, which
includes their growing interaction with Al friends.

Second, schools serve multiple, interrelated
purposes in children’s lives and in society. While
they are widely understood as places for academic
learning, they are also central spaces for social
development, personal growth, and learning

how to live in a diverse community. In school,
children learn to understand others’ perspectives,
collaborate, negotiate differences, and build the
social and emotional skills needed to participate

in diverse communities. At the same time, schools
are environments where children can develop
capacities that prepare them for future work,
meaningful life pathways, and participation in civic
life. Schools can provide stability, routine, and care;
support children’s well-being; and enable parents’

labor-force participation (Winthrop et al. 2015).
Thus, we broadly examine Al in terms of the role
schools play in academic, developmental, social,
civic, and economic roles — all of which are deeply
intertwined in children's everyday educational
experiences.

Finally, technology has long been heralded as
inherently “transforming” education—a means to
overcome existing constraints in the education
system. The prevailing narrative suggests that the
very adoption and use of technology represent
innovation and progress, with the implication

that schools and students who do not use these
tools will suffer academically, vocationally, and
personally. This same rhetoric now drives the
adoption and use of Al in schools (Reich 2025).

However, decades of investment and
implementation have demonstrated that
technology's educational benefits have been

mixed at best (UNESCO 2023). Multiple rigorous
cross-national studies have shown that education
systems investing heavily in technology do not
necessarily experience improved teaching and
learning outcomes (OECD 2015; West 2023). The
mobile broadband example illustrates this pattern—
while Internet expansion correlates with economic
development, a study of 2.5 million 15-year-olds
from 82 countries suggests that the rollout of 3G
coverage from 2000-2018 produced statistically
significant declines in math, reading, and science
scores, as well as students’ social relationships
and sense of belonging (Jain and Stemper 2024).
Rhetoric arguing that technology adoption in and of
itself represents innovation and progress is not only
false but undermines society's ability to discern
how to effectively harness Al to advance children’s
education (Reich 2025).

Research indicates that technology contributes
most effectively to educational improvement

when embedded within carefully designed and
implemented strategies (Hardman et al. 2019). This
requires several conditions. Tools and platforms
must be designed ethically and responsibly,
grounded in the learning sciences. Schools and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 21
families must work in partnership to ensure that
children’s Al use supports—not harms—their
learning and development. Al tools must support
human relationships, including the teacher-student
relationship, using sound pedagogical practices
designed to augment, rather than substitute
student learning. Finally, educators and students
must remain aware of both the benefits and harms
these technologies present. When these conditions
align, Al has the potential to meaningfully enhance
educational outcomes while minimizing risks to
learners. This conceptual grounding provides
valuable guidance for understanding and
discussing Al in educational contexts.

Our methods:

A premortem on
Al and children’s
education

In September 2024, the Center for Universal
Education launched the Brookings Global Task
Force on Al and Education with the goal of
conducting a premortem on Al and education. A
premortem anticipates potential failures before
implementing an innovation. Unlike a postmortem,
which examines failure after occurrence, the
“prospective insight" gained from a premortem
helps to anticipate potential issues with any
innovation so they can be corrected or mitigated
before norms of use become entrenched (Burns
and Winthrop 2024; Mitchell et al. 1989; Veinott
et al. 2010). Rather than waiting years to discover
the negative impacts of Al, our goal is to help
educators, parents, policymakers, technology
companies, and students themselves identify
steps they can take now to prevent potential
negative impacts and support positive outcomes.
Importantly, a premortem is not an exercise in
pessimism; we expect Al can enrich students’
learning experiences. However, to harness these
benefits, harms and unintended consequences

require deliberate anticipation to prevent
or mitigate.

The two guiding research questions of this
report are:

« What are the potential negative risks that
generative Al poses to the education of children
and youth?

Assuming these potential risks, what can

we begin to do now to prevent them while
maximizing the potential benefits of Al?

This report focuses primarily on school-aged
children and youth (defined in this report as
those under 18) and the ways Al is shaping their
education. Our student study participants ranged
from ages 13 to 17. We begin at age 13 since
this is the threshold at which Al companies, and
other technology companies, commonly permit
legal access to Al products. However, as will
become evident throughout this report, many
students younger than 13 are already accessing
these products.

From September 2024 to October 2025, we
examined Al's evolving role in education through
focus groups, interviews, and expert consultations
with over 500 educators, policymakers,
technologists, civil society leaders, task force
steering committee members, educators, students,
and parents across 50 countries, alongside a
literature review of over 400 articles and guidance
from a Delphi panel of 21 experts (See Box 1). Our
understanding has been enriched by these diverse
perspectives and throughout the report we refer to
those participating in interviews, focus groups, and
consultations as study participants. At the heart of
our inquiry are the voices of those on the frontlines:
teachers, students, and parents and caregivers.
Their ideas and experiences form the foundation of
this report.

A more detailed explanation of our research,
including the data frame, data collection
instruments, and analysis procedures, is available
in Annex C and on the Brookings website. While

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 22
a premortem approach cannot provide definitive of such uncertainty (Harari 2024). A premortem
answers to Al’s potential risks and benefits—and approach helps us better understand the range
given the rapidly evolving nature of Al, many of issues we must attend to in order to support all
answers remain unknowable—it is essential that children's learning and development.

we interrogate new technologies even in the face

Data sources

To capture the emerging nature of Al in education, we conducted group
interviews and focus groups. The perspectives and lived experiences of these key informants form the
foundation of our findings. participants included students, educators, and parents and
caregivers, hereafter referred to as parents. included a broad range of key informants
we call in this report “experts”: university researchers, education leaders, Al education practitioners,
government officials, members of think tanks and non-governmental organizations, and business and
community leaders.

Guided by the two research questions, and to better situ-
ate study participants’ experiences within a theoretical context, we conducted an extensive review of
studies on Al in education published after November 2022. Given the nascent state of this field, the
rapid pace of Al development, and the scarcity of experimental and longitudinal research, the review
adopted a pragmatic approach, also incorporating preliminary findings and smaller-scale investigations,
policy documents, essays, and case studies. We reviewed over 400 articles, using these insights to
inform our analysis and findings.

The Delphi approach uses a series of open-ended questions posed to highly knowl-
edgeable experts within a structured consensus-building approach. This makes it particularly useful
for predicting trends and forming guidance when clear data or field consensus does not yet exist
(Khodyakov 2023). We convened a Delphi panel of education leaders and Al specialists who analyzed
and commented on the combined data collected from study participants and the literature review.
However, unlike the key informants mentioned above, Delphi panelists did not participate in interviews.
The views and guidance of Delphi panelists are integrated throughout this report.

We conducted consultations with a wide variety of stakeholders in order to inform
each stage of the research process—getting feedback on the methodology, stress testing data col-
lection instruments, surfacing gaps in preliminary findings, and final data analysis. The participants in
these consultations ranged from high-level decisionmakers (including those on the task force steer-
ing committee) to funders and practitioners such as ed-tech leaders, nongovernmental organization
representatives, child development specialists, learning scientists, and technologists.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

FIGURE 3

Map of study participants’ countries

=

s
s

}

4
EG ot
t 2
x® ~~. |
2 hal
. Ndi ny

© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

What is
generative Al?

Al has a long history, including in education.
Predictive Al, for example, has long been used in
intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) to guide students
in their formulation of a correct response to a

test question.

Generative Al, the focus of this report, refers to a
class of technologies that generate novel outputs
such as text, images, audio, code, or video in
response to user prompts. These technologies
include LLMs, diffusion models, and other neural
network architectures designed for content
generation. Generative Al is a form of machine
learning that creates new content rather than
simply analyzing or classifying existing data.
These systems are typically trained on vast
datasets composed of publicly available digital
content—words, images, and sounds (see Box 2 for

common sources for generative Al). Contemporary
models increasingly incorporate curated, domain-
specific, and proprietary data tailored to specific
applications, including educational ones.

Common sources
for generative Al

Commot awl (a vast publicly available
dataset across more than 40 languages)
WebText2 (webpages linked from Reddit
posts with at least three upvotes)

Books1 and Books2 (collections of online
books, such as Project Gutenberg's public
domain texts and self-published works from
Book Corpus)

English-language Wikipedia (Rettberg 2022)

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 24
Alis not a single tool. Rather, within educational
contexts, it encompasses a diverse and often
overlapping ecosystem of platforms and
applications designed for different purposes. They
range from education-specific Al products used
directly by students and created by commercial
technology companies to the incorporation of Al
into teacher-facing products created by long-
standing education technology companies. Al

also includes learning products on video game
platforms and the Al “friends” or “companions” that
students access through social media platforms.
Education technology providers are typically
for-profit companies, reflecting the substantial
growth in the ed-tech sector (Grand View Research
2025), although such providers may also include
universities or governments. In South Korea,

for example, the Korea Education and Research
Information Service, a government educational
organization leading technology development in
Korean schools, created the Al courseware platform
used across the nation's schools (KERIS 2025).

Box 3 broadly categorizes the seven types of

Al tools that study participants reported using.
Throughout this report, we will, where data permits,
make explicit distinctions among the various

forms of Al under discussion. For example, we will
endeavor to distinguish between students engaging
in open-ended unmediated discussion with LLMs
versus students using creative Al technologies

like video or image generators or teachers using
Al-supported adaptive learning programs with
vetted content. Yet the vast majority of study
participants report using LLMs (specifically,
ChatGPT) for education activities; as reported,
teacher use of Al tools outpaces that of students.

Although Al systems generate responses that often
appear intelligent and contextually appropriate,
their outputs result from sophisticated statistical
pattern-matching rather than genuine knowledge or
creative reasoning (Kleiman and Gallagher 2024).
Al systems and human intelligence are completely
different entities, a distinction that carries profound
implications for educational practice. While Al is far
ahead of humans in computations, at the time of

writing it currently remains less proficient in skills
like cognitive flexibility and long-term planning in
novel situations (Cukurova 2024, 471). Al represents
knowledge stripped of experience and cannot
replace the wide range of human experiences and
interactions (Kleiman and Gallagher 2024). As we
consider bringing Al into learning environments, it is
important for all those involved in education to keep
the above facts in mind to ensure that we maintain
clarity about which uniquely human capacities we
seek to develop in our students.

Understanding Al is one part of the larger focus

of this report; equally important is how and where
children and youth use these tools. We turn now to
this discussion.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 25
Types of Al tools and platforms study
participants commonly report using

Teacher productivity and planning tools: Platforms such as Gradescope, MagicSchool, and Notion.ai
support teachers’ administrative and instructional workflows. They automate grading and feedback,
generate standards-aligned lesson and assessment materials, produce differentiated resources, and
assist with documentation such as individualized education plans and progress reports.
Student-facing adaptive and learning systems: Al-powered platforms like MATHia, Knewton Alta,
and DreamBox personalize learning by analyzing student responses in real time, adjusting content
difficulty, identifying misconceptions, and providing targeted feedback to close knowledge gaps.
General-purpose generative Al: LLMs such as ChatGPT, Claude, and Gemini function as versatile
tools for both teachers and students. These tools are not designed to teach; they are designed to be
helpful task replacement tools prioritizing efficiency (Quezzaire 2025; Kestin et al. 2025). Teachers
use them to draft lesson plans, design assessments, and create instructional materials. Students
employ them for research assistance, writing support, coding help, and conceptual understanding
across disciplines. LLMs vary in the design features used to encourage extended use and engage-
ment on their platforms.

Companion platforms: Models such as Character.ai and Replika.ai provide users with Al “compan-
ions" or “friends” that simulate sustained conversation or interaction with users. They are designed
to maximize engagement and extend the time users spend on the platform.

Specialized academic and domain tools: Subject-specific platforms leverage Al to support mastery
in particular domains—for example, Duolingo for language acquisition, Photomath for mathematical
problem solving, and GitHub Copilot for programming and computational tasks.

Institutional and ad. istrative Al systems: These tools and platforms are used by schools or
ministries for predictive analytics, attendance tracking, or early warning systems, such as Civitas
Learning, PowerSchool, or PraxiSchool.

Al-enhanced assistive technologies: These tools support accessibility, such as speech-to-text
(Otter.ai), text-to-speech, or real-time translation, such as Microsoft Translator and Seeing Al.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
() CONTEXT:

Students are increasingly accessing
Al outside of school, and families
continue to be on the front lines

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Our students are not regularly accessing Al but our kids are.
— Steering Committee member

Parents need to be educated too. We don’t know much about this technology, and if our kids are
using it, we should know what it is. If we know that [Al] is beneficial for children, then by all means
they should know more about it. But if it causes a loss, we should know about that, too.

— Parent

A lot of schools, including mine, blocked ChatGPT, but people will go on their phones and use
Snapchat Al or Meta Al. People use Gemini, they use DeepSeek. Really, there are so many Als
that even if a school bans them, people are still going to be able to access it.
—Student

Al is here to stay. Kids need to explore the positives on how to use it.

— Parent

Young people in many parts of the globe are
accessing Al through multiple pathways. For those
with devices and connectivity, Al may be almost
impossible to avoid. While pedagogically sound Al

tools that support children’s learning through vetted

content are only one of the ways that students
encounter Al, they are far from the only way. Many
students engage with Al through school, but as
many (if not more) may be regularly accessing

Al outside of school for an increasing range of
everyday activities. Al is ever more ubiquitous,
embedded in search results, social media feeds,
video games, and even toys (Zhou 2025). This
reality places families, parents, and community
organizations on the front line alongside teachers
and school leaders as essential figures helping
guide students toward effective and ethical Al use.

Any assessment of the potential impacts of Al

on students’ learning and development must

also include a holistic analysis of how children
encounter Al both in and outside of school. Hence,
any strategy to mitigate Al's risks and harness its
benefits needs to include a focus on supporting
families and community members.

Widespread Al
use by children
and youth

As mentioned above, multiple factors, including
access to connectivity and devices, create variation
in Al usage by children and youth around the world.
Recent surveys across North America, Europe, Asia,
and Latin America show high levels of exposure to
and use of Al.

Figure 4 below reviews a selection of nationally
representative surveys conducted in 2024 and
2025 asking about the Al use of children and youth.
While the data are not directly comparable, given
the variation in the surveys in each country, they do
provide a snapshot of young people's interaction
with Al in middle- and high-income countries.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 28
FIGURE 4

Children’s Al use around the world

Cc RY AGES URVEY FINDINGS YEAR
ARGENTINA 9-17 58% of respondents have used ChatGPT 2024
° .
AUSTRALIA 14-17 94% of respondents have used a generative Al tool 2025
(in any capacity)
SINGAPORE 13417 80% of respondents use generative Al at least 2024
once a week
nopen 13419 95% of respondents have used ChatGPT 2024
TAIWAN Junior and senior high 58% of respondents use Al at least once a week 2025
kiNebow 13-18 67% of respondents have used generative Al 2025
UNITED _ 91% of respondents used generative Al in their
STATES B17 personal life 2025

Sources: Ipsos, 2024; Madden et al., 2024; COX Mobile, 2025; Picton et al., 2025; Centre for Evidence and Implementation,
2025; Denejkina, 2025; Child Welfare League Foundation, 2025; UNICEF-UNESCO, 2025; Joon-hyun, 2025.

While children’s use of Al will likely grow, this trend
tells us little about how they access and use it, a
topic we will explore next.

The blurred lines of
children’s Al use

The versatility of commercial general-purpose
chatbots and the seamless integration of Al across
multiple digital platforms means the lines between
education technology, friendship, information
query, and entertainment are blurring. Students in
our study report using Al through general purpose
LLMs, social media, Internet search, video games,
and education technology, often moving fluidly
between these platforms.

Young people use the game-based learning hub in
Roblox, a gaming platform with 111.8 million daily
active users across 180 countries, to hone their
numeracy, science, and coding skills (Nordicity
2025; Roblox 2025a). These games are popular;
one Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM)-focused game created by
Sesame Workshop has received 70 million visits
(Roblox 2025b). Some students strategically upload
class notes to Google NotebookLM to create flash
cards to help with test preparation while binge-
watching humorous YouTube videos. Meanwhile,
others integrate Al into daily routines via social
media. Snapchat's My Al chatbot was directly
integrated into the existing Snapchat app for all
users in April 2023, immediately distributing Al

to its nearly 150 million users aged 13-17 globally
(Dixon 2025; Snapchat 2023; Snapchat 2025).
Students in our study talked about sending friends
humorous pictures on Snapchat before turning to

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 29
the platform's Al feature for dating advice—and
to complete their math homework for them (see
Figure 5).

In our study, students reported accessing Al
through a combination of platforms, including
LLMs, social media platforms, Internet searches,

FIGURE £

Al "friends," and video games. A nationally
representative survey of student Al use in the
United Kingdom (UK) similarly found that young
people use a mix of platforms, with LLMs like
ChatGPT and Gemini and social media like
Snapchat topping the list (Internet Matters 2025).

The blurred lines of children's Al use

LEARNING

© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 30
FIGURE 6

ChatGPT usage by month

80B

60B

40B

Daily average ChatGPT usage
(# of tokens generated)

20B

May 2025 June 2025

0B ; a ; '

July 2025

August 2025 September 2025
(as of Sept. 14)

Source: Wilkins, 2025; OpenRouter, 2025

It does appear that many users are using these

Al tools as part of their educational experience.
While Al usage data is constantly changing,
worldwide data on ChatGPT usage in 2025 shows
a reduction in use during June through August
when many northern hemisphere schools are out of
session, indicating heavy student educational use
(Wilkins 2025).

Families on
the front lines

In navigating the terrain of children’s multifaceted
Al use outside of school, families and community
members find themselves on the front lines. In
many ways, this adds an extra and unfair burden on

already overstretched caregivers. But as unfair as
itis, it doesn't take away the crucial role that these
adults play in guiding children and youth to live well
in an Al world.

One of the main insights from our study was the
limited awareness parents and caregivers possess
concerning the range of benefits and risks that Al
poses to their children's learning and development.
Families are busy juggling multiple responsibilities,
and often parents and caregivers haven't had

the opportunity to understand Al and its effects

on children. Little support is provided in terms of
programs, outreach, or Al literacy for families and
community organizations who care for children
outside of school, yet the majority of families we
interviewed want this support.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

31
Al is helping my child by “becoming independent in their

learning process...when they are stuck, they can easily just

know where to get help from.”

Of the parents interviewed for this study, nearly
all held mixed feelings about Al. On the one hand,
they want their children to have the exposure

and necessary skills to successfully participate

in a workplace where Al will be ubiquitous. Many
parents also appreciate the academic assistance
Al can provide, especially when their children are
stuck with schoolwork and need help. Caregivers
in Ghana and Nigeria felt that Al was better able
to explain schoolwork concepts and it helped
children learn without waiting for adult assistance.
As one parent explained, Al is helping her child by
“becoming independent in their learning process...
when they are stuck, they can easily just know
where to get help from.”

These sentiments are pervasive in our study and
across research on caregivers generally. For
some parents in China, Al assists their children
with learning while parents work and manage the
needs of daily life. One researcher noted the rise
in China of “Al babysitting, where parent circles

share resources on prompting Al to guide learning”

(Yan and Heting 2025). In the United States (U.S.),
a 2024 national survey found that 69% of parents

believed Al chatbots are a valuable tool to help their
children learn more faster (Impact Research 2024).

Parents in our study also express significant
concerns about Al's potential impact on their
children, concerns that are supported by broader
research on parental attitudes toward Al (Internet
Matters Team 2025). The main concerns center
on the harms of Al vis-a-vis children's cognitive
abilities and their emotional well-being because
of overuse.

As we will explore further, and discuss in the
recommendations in Section VI, the complex
interplay between Al benefits and risks on children’s
learning and development will require that we
engage families as active partners with teachers
and schools.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 32
() POTENTIAL OUTCOME 1:

Al can enrich learning if
well-designed and anchored in
sound pedagogy

When ChatGPT burst onto the scene in November 2022, many schools approached its adoption with an
abundance of caution about its novelty, as well as its impact on student safety and learning. A number
of education systems and schools initially banned its use (Johnson 2023). Yet within a matter of months,
bans gave way to cautious experimentation and, in many cases, enthusiastic adoption across multiple
education systems globally (Lake 2023).

Al has numerous design elements that positively impact its adoption, use, and benefits. Unlike specialized
technologies that often require expensive licenses or infrastructure, many LLMs remain free, though

with use restrictions and functionality constraints. Their power rests in their generality; they can produce

a variety of creative outputs including musical compositions, sonnets, novels, or videos. A range of Al
powered creativity tools—from vibe coding to video production—provide students and educators with new

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
ways to explore ideas and bring them to life. These
outputs can be refined and made more specific with
increasingly targeted user prompts (Burns 2024,
53). This refinement capability means that even
schools without access to specialized curriculum
resources, local multimedia content, or specialized
staff can adapt Al tools to meet their specific
instructional needs. Over time, new and varied

uses of Al that enhance student learning will likely
emerge as the technology advances, and educators
become more adept at using it.

Al tools are almost intuitive in their use. Many
dedicated Al platforms, like ChatGPT, DeepSeek,
or Khanmigo, involve user prompts instead of
confusing menus. Al is embedded in common
technology tools, like Google and Microsoft's
productivity suites, allowing users to benefit from
Al-powered features without needing to learn
new skills. These characteristics—rapid adoption,
accessibility, generality, the ability to iteratively
refine outputs, and ease of use—create the
foundation for the educational benefits that follow,
with particular promise for democratizing access to
powerful learning tools across schools regardless
of resource levels.

According to study participants, Al offers benefits
for students and their teachers that fall into two
distinct, though interrelated, categories. First, for
teachers, Al functions as a powerful productivity
tool that replaces routine tasks—lesson planning,
grading, assessment design, administrative work—
freeing them to focus on high-yield activities such
as differentiated support, individualized feedback,
and relationship building. Second, Al offers
personalized learning benefits directly to students
through adaptive platforms, writing tools, and
tutoring programs that tailor instruction to individual
needs. Thus, as will be discussed in this section,
Al's dual capacity—to free teacher time through
task automation and to provide personalized
learning tools directly to students—can, in the
words of one teacher, "democratizes access”

to individualized learning and support, enabling
teachers to focus their limited time on students who
need the most intensive supports.

Benefit 1: Al can
improve equity

by addressing
educational
resource gaps and
expanding access
to education

Al represents the democratization of academic
assistance.
— Expert

Al makes learning better for the students. We
are not exposed to knowledge like in other
countries. With Al, we can catch up just like
learners in other countries.

— Student

One of the most compelling arguments for Al in
education is its potential to advance educational
equity through expanding access to educational
opportunities, especially for students who have
previously been excluded from formal schooling.
Technology has a long history of providing
access to learning for communities lacking quality
in-person teaching. Interactive Audio Instruction,
live radio tutoring, and television classes like
Mexico's Telesecundaria + program can scale
learning opportunities; deliver national curriculum
to learners in remote areas; support community
volunteer teachers who have little or no training;
provide targeted instruction to out-of-school
youth and refugees; and offer some degree of
standardized educational quality where qualified
teachers are absent (Burns 2023b, 38-39).

The need for such interventions is urgent. Globally,
millions of children struggle just to access
education, including 251 million out-of-school
children (O'Donnell 2025, UNESCO 2024). Students

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 34
in resource-limited communities worldwide have
the most to gain from high-quality education yet are
often taught by poorly qualified teachers (UNESCO
Institute for Statistics and Education for All Global
Monitoring Report 2014; Qin and Bowen 2019;
UNESCO and International Task Force on Teachers
for Education 2024). Technology, including Al, can
help bridge this capacity gap by providing access
to quality instructional materials where human
expertise is absent or limited (Wang et al. 2025).

In Afghanistan, where the Taliban
has banned women from post-
primary education, girls and
women have harnessed the
potential of the Internet and Al
to further their education.

A lack of access to education doesn't simply mean
exclusion from learning; it often represents isolation
from a social and educational community. For
those outside formal education systems—religious
and ethnic minorities, internally displaced people,
and in some regions, girls and young women—

Al can be an academic and emotional lifeline.

In Afghanistan, where the Taliban has banned
women from post-primary education, girls and
women have harnessed the potential of the Internet
and Al to further their education. The School of
Leadership Afghanistan has employed Al to digitize
the Afghan curriculum, create lessons based on
this curriculum, and disseminate content in Dari,
Pashto, and English via WhatsApp lessons (Botti-
Lodovico 2025). More poignantly, faced with severe
restrictions on their physical movements and social
interactions, many Afghan girls and young women
are using chatbots for emotional support and
friendship (Clun 2025).

ADDRESSING CAPACITY CONSTRAINTS

Low-resource education systems struggle with
fundamental constraints—insufficient funding, lack
of trained teachers, overcrowded facilities, and
minimal time or resources for individualized support
for learners. Al holds promise in addressing many
of these constraints.

For example, Al technologies can address
capacity constraints at the individual learner level
by functioning as an independent, self-directed
learning tool, potentially more affordable and
accessible than traditional educational resources.
Teachers interviewed for this study particularly
recognize the potential of Al tools like LLMs and
tutoring programs to benefit struggling learners,
many of whom come from underresourced
backgrounds, thereby expanding equitable access
to educational support that was previously available
only to those with greater resources (Burns 2021).
LLMs can translate content into local languages
while providing ubiquitous access to current
information and accelerating the development

of basic skills. Indeed, as one teacher from India
notes, for students with high degrees of self-
directedness and curiosity, LLMs are “a goldmine.”

At the systemic level, the economic accessibility
and open-source nature of some Al tools further
enhance their equity potential for schools. Free Al
tools can reduce school software expenditures,
while individual monthly subscription fees for
more advanced LLMs, though prohibitive for many,
remain affordable enough that several teachers in
our study reported pooling resources to share a
monthly subscription.

Additionally, Al technologies—including chatbots,
LLMs, ITSs, productivity tools, and adaptive
applications—can compensate for gaps in teacher
knowledge while providing crucial scaffolding for
paraprofessionals, emergency teachers, long-term
substitutes, and educators teaching outside

their area of certification. Low-cost Al tools, trial
versions, and even free LLMs can be particularly
valuable for critical teacher functions such as

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 35
lesson planning and assessment design, helping
mitigate the impact of teacher absences and poor
teacher quality by augmenting, not replacing,
human teaching capacity (Burns 2023b).

Beyond their direct support to students, which will
be discussed in Benefit 4, personalized Al programs
also hold considerable promise for strengthening
teacher capacity itself, addressing the instructional
limitations that often constrain learning in
underresourced settings. While research on
student-facing applications dominates the literature,
emerging evidence suggests that teacher-facing
Al tools can compensate for deficiencies in
content knowledge, provide essential scaffolding
for para-teachers or unqualified instructors, and
enhance overall instruction quality (Burns 2023b).
Additionally, ITSs, grounded in predictive Al, can
leverage Al to help teachers in low-resource
contexts interpret and act upon the diagnostic data
that ITSs provide, suggest instructional strategies,
and draft follow-up lesson plans. This support

is particularly valuable for teachers who may

lack content expertise or pedagogical training,
particularly in contexts where pre-service teacher
preparation and ongoing teacher professional
development remain unavailable or insufficient.

INDIVIDUALIZED ATTENTION IN
CROWDED CLASSROOMS

The personalization capabilities of Al (discussed

in greater detail in Benefit 4) represent

perhaps the most significant opportunity for
addressing educational inequities, particularly in
underresourced educational contexts globally.
Research suggests that personalized learning,
with and without Al, may help narrow learning
gaps for marginalized students in the Global South,
where class sizes are often large, undiagnosed
learning issues common, and teacher capacity

for individualized attention scarce. Al-driven
personalized platforms allow teachers to create
smaller instructional groupings working on
differentiated tasks, freeing teachers to concentrate
on students requiring individualized attention, and
supporting tailored, developmentally appropriate

“teaching at the right level" approaches (Major

and Francis 2020). Thus, personalized learning
programs may narrow achievement gaps among
marginalized students through high-dosage tutoring
at significantly reduced costs, expanding access

to educational support previously available only to
those with greater resources (Burns 2021).

CONCLUSION

While Al's benefits still favorably accrue to those
with robust infrastructure, there are a number of
technical innovations that can extend Al's benefits
to underserved communities. Box 4 outlines several
approaches to address these challenges in reach
and affordability. Though issues around updating,
handling diverse student queries, and ensuring
device neutrality remain, such developments can
potentially make Al access more equitable.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 36
Possible solutions for expanding
access to Al in underserved areas

Small language models (SLMs) are language models with less computational
complexity and a smaller amount of training. In contrast to LLMs, they consume less energy and require
fewer resources, making them less expensive and more accessible for widespread use, particularly
in low-resource settings (Kumar et al. 2025). SLMs trained on specific content or languages, when
bundled with technologies students already possess and know how to use, like smartphones and
messaging apps, could deliver low-cost, high-reach education. SLMs will be discussed in greater
length under Risk 4.

These are models where the trained model parameters are freely available for
use and distribution, eliminating subscription fees. DeepSeek, LLaMA and most recently OpenAl, have
all released open weight models (OpenAl 2025b). Open weights refer to the final parameters—the
weights and biases—of a trained neural network that determine how the model interprets inputs and
generates outputs. When Al developers share these parameters, they enable others to fine-tune,
adapt, or deploy the model for their own projects, though the weights themselves do not include the
underlying training code or datasets (Open Source Initiative 2025).

These open-weight models can run on devices with 16 gigabytes of memory, operate offline for
enhanced data privacy, and (in the case of OpenAl) are released under the permissive Apache 2.0
license, although licensing terms vary across different models (Huckins 2025). Open-weight models
allow developers, researchers, and educators—especially in low-resource settings—to experiment with
and build Al tools without needing access to proprietary application programming interfaces (APIs),
costly cloud service fees, or restrictive licensing agreements—though they do not eliminate all costs.

Mobile-based Al applications can mitigate local
infrastructure constraints and reach users despite Internet or cellular network limitations (Stasenko
et al. 2025). Trained Al models can be loaded onto devices, such as game consoles, “dumb phones,”
through distribution to schools via Secure Digital cards, USB drives, or single-board computers like
Raspberry Pi, thus enabling access to Al content—albeit with some degree of degraded functionality—
without Internet connectivity. Platforms such as the World Possible's Remote Area Community Hotspot
for Education and Learning and Learning Equality's Kolibri have established precedents for offline
solutions in low-connectivity educational contexts (Learning Equality 2025; World Possible 2025).

As an example of the potential solutions above, Llama Filesan—an open-source project that simplifies
running LLMs on personal computers—enables “local Al.” This is Al that runs on users’ devices, not in
the cloud. This ensures privacy, offline accessibility, control over data, and (perhaps more importantly)
reduced dependence on the dominance of "Big Tech" Al companies that provide LLMs (Stasenko et
al. 2025, 46).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

Benefit 2: Al can
optimize teacher
time for greater
focus on students

Al is my favorite colleague.
— Teacher

Teaching, though often spoken of as a unitary
activity, actually comprises a series of highly
discrete tasks—planning, reporting, assessing,
designing, instructing, and revising—with

each containing an even more diverse array

of subtasks. Understanding this complexity is
essential when examining how Al is transforming
educational practice.

Teachers report being enthusiastic Al users,
particularly of LLMs, lesson plan generators, and
student learning platforms. A separate internal,
unpublished Brookings’ survey of 303 teachers
in the U.S. and India revealed varying degrees of
Al adoption among teachers with Internet access.
Twenty-seven percent described themselves as
“beginning to explore” Al, 37% reported “trying a
few things,” 34% indicated “regularly integrating”
Al into their practice, 24% reported creating
specific Al activities, and 17% described training
or supporting teacher colleagues in Al use. Only
3% reported non-use of Al. Since teachers could
select multiple categories, these percentages
reflect overlapping stages of adoption rather than
discrete groups.

While these data are preliminary and limited in
scope, the representation of different groups

of teachers reporting non-use, exploration,
experimentation, routine integration, and
appropriation demonstrates patterns consistent
with Hord et al.'s (2006) Levels of Use framework,
which characterizes how teachers progress in
adopting educational innovations, like Al, from initial

awareness through mechanical use to integration
and refinement.

Al AS A PRODUCTIVITY TOOL

At this relatively early stage of Al's trajectory,
one of its greatest benefits rests in its power
as a productivity tool, typically used outside

of classroom hours to enhance teaching and
learning outcomes.

Teachers interviewed for this study use Al
primarily for “task replacement"—automating
activities traditionally performed by human beings
(Quezzaire 2025). Analysis of coded data reveals
that 78% of teacher responses indicated using Al
primarily for productivity-related activities. This
includes generating parent emails, grading and
providing feedback, translating materials, creating
worksheets, rubrics, quizzes, and lesson plans,
developing content, tutoring students, creating
individualized education plans, automating essay
scoring, and checking work authenticity (Ferman
et al. 2024). This pattern appears to be Al's most
dominant application and is consistent with data
across multiple studies showing that teachers
primarily use Al for productivity purposes (Celik et
al. 2022; Quezzaire 2025; Roy et al. 2024; Deng
et al. 2025; Code.org et al. 2025; Malek Ash 2025;
Leiva et al. 2025).

The evidence shows that these productivity gains
are both significant and measurable. A recent
study by the Education Endowment Foundation
demonstrated clear efficiency from the use of Al
in education. During the summer term of 2024,

a randomized controlled trial in the UK was
conducted with 259 science teachers from Year
7 and Year 8 across 68 schools over a 10-week
period. Teachers in the intervention group used
ChatGPT to develop lessons and resources for
their classes and were provided with an online
implementation guide. In contrast, teachers in the
control group were instructed to prepare lessons
without using any Al tools (Roy et al. 2024).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

38
The findings demonstrated that teachers using
ChatGPT for lesson preparation experienced a
31% reduction in planning time, completing tasks
in 56.2 minutes compared to 81.5 minutes for
nonusers and thereby saving an average of 25.3
minutes per week. Crucially, this efficiency gain
did not compromise quality, as an expert panel
could not distinguish between resources created
with and without ChatGPT assistance (Roy et al.
2024). These findings align with broader patterns
observed in American educational contexts. A
Gallup and Walton Family Foundation survey found
that U.S. teachers who report using Al tools report
even greater time savings—an average of 5.9 hours
weekly, or 6 weeks over a school year of 37.4
weeks (Malek Ash 2025).

The impact of these productivity gains extends
beyond individual time savings, suggesting
meaningful implications for teacher workload and
sustainable practice in education.

THE Al TEACHING DIVIDEND

Task replacement through Al generates efficiency
gains that benefit both teachers and students
(Cambium Learning Group 2024). Teacher
interviews confirm these findings, with educators
reporting direct workload reduction as a result of Al
use for productivity. Most critically, these efficiency
gains offer a substantial “dividend” that can be
reallocated and reinvested in more high-yield uses
of teachers’ time that can directly benefit students
(Impact Research 2024; Malek Ash 2025).

This optimization (the shift from low-impact to
high-impact activities) occurs at two levels. First,
teachers enhance decisionmaking processes

and workflow, including curriculum sequencing
for improved knowledge retention, resource
allocation across programs, and analyzing student
performance data to identify learning gaps and
recommend instructional strategies (Celik et al.
2022). For instance, teachers in Singapore, one of
our study sites, use Al to manage basic corrections
like punctuation and capitalization, allowing both

teachers and students to focus on voice, style, and
argumentation.

Second, the time saved from non-student-facing
tasks can be reallocated to prioritizing direct
engagement and relationship-building through
progress monitoring, individualized feedback,
targeted interventions, and personalized instruction
(Celik et al. 2022). While more research is needed
on how widespread these practices are and how
teachers actually use this additional time, teacher
interviews suggest that this optimization of teacher
workflow may play a meaningful part in student
learning outcomes.

SUPPORTING TEACHER RETENTION

While task replacement offers significant benefits
to individual teachers and students, it also holds
potential value for the education system itself. This
systemic impact becomes clear when examining
the workload crisis facing the teaching profession.

With a few exceptions, educational systems across
the globe are facing a dramatic teacher shortage.
The United National Educational, Scientific, and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) estimates the
need for 44 million additional teachers by 2030

in order to reach Sustainable Development Goal

4 of providing inclusive, equitable, and quality
education for all (UNESCO and International Task
Force on Teachers for Education 2030 2024).
While numerous discrete and cumulative factors
drive the global teacher shortage, workload plays a
critical role. In the U.S., for example, teachers work
substantially more hours than other professionals,
averaging 53 hours per week during the school
year, compared to 46 hours for non-teaching
professionals and in England teachers average 48
hours of work per week (Doherty 2020; Steiner et
al. 2023). Compounding this burden, as much as
25% of teachers’ work remains uncompensated
(Steiner et al. 2023).

Evidence suggests that excessive workload is a key
contributor to teacher attrition (teachers leaving
the profession for reasons other than retirement)

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 39
and may in fact constitute “the crucial factor"
influencing teachers’ decisions to leave teaching
(Worth et al. 2018). Teachers experiencing burnout
from the demands of teaching are more likely

to leave the profession (Steiner et al. 2023). In
England, “unmanageable workload"—marking, data
collection, inspection requirements, paperwork, and
frequent curriculum changes—represents the most
frequently cited reason teachers give for leaving
(Duff 2018).

Teacher attrition extends far beyond individual
career decisions to threaten overall educational
quality, particularly for learners most in need of
high-quality educational interventions—those in
refugee contexts, rural schools, urban schools
serving children of color who are poor or migrants,
and learners in the poorest global regions,
including sub-Saharan Africa and Southwest Asia
(Akiba et al. 2007; Ring and West 2015; Teacher
Task Force 2021; United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization 2022). Attrition
is also enormously expensive for education
systems, requiring schools and districts to shift
financial and human resources away from other
programs to recruit, hire, and train replacements
(National Commission on Teaching and America’s
Future 2007).

The Learning Policy Institute estimates that
replacing one teacher in a large U.S. district costs
an average of $25,000 (2024). Thus, a U.S. school
district with 5,000 teachers and a very conservative
12% attrition rate faces annual replacement costs
of approximately $15 million. Given such substantial
financial implications, support like Al that reduce
work demands and increase efficiency represent
critical developments.

CONCLUSION

While these time-saving benefits need to be
combined with other reforms around pay and
working conditions, anything that makes teaching
more “efficient” offers welcome relief. There
certainly are other innovations, such as reimaging
the composition of the education workforce, that

can help address teacher shortages (Ingersoll and
Audrain 2025). But alongside these, Al's growing
capacity to complete educator-related tasks, even
complex ones, with greater speed and quality holds
great promise for both teachers and students,
offering expanded time savings and enhanced
optimization of the essential human interactions at
the core of teaching (Fisher 2025). Thus, provided
that administrators protect this newly gained
teacher time (see Box 5), the productivity and
efficiency gains of Al may serve a supporting role
in overall policies focused on addressing teacher
workloads to enhance retention.

Time savings

only occur if
teacher workloads
remain steady

The Al teaching dividend described here only
materializes if education leaders maintain
teachers’ current workloads. Participants in
the study expressed concerns that time sav-
ings from using Al could be quickly eroded
if administrators assigned additional duties.
Some educators also worried about openly
sharing the extent of their time savings, fear-
ing that government leaders might view it as
an opportunity to cut costs, do more with less,
and significantly increase teacher workloads.
Ultimately, understanding system dynamics
is essential when considering potential out-
comes of implementing innovation (Fuller and
Kim 2022; Sengeh and Winthrop 2022).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 40
Benefit 3: Al can
improve student
learning

Al explains things better.
— Parent, student, teacher

Al provides a wide range of potential and actual
benefits to students’ learning and development
through both direct and indirect pathways. As

is often the case with new technologies, there

is a lag between the use of Al and rigorous
research documenting the accumulated benefits
on student learning. This reality notwithstanding,
interviews with study participants suggest that Al
applications, when implemented in pedagogically
and developmentally appropriate ways, can
meaningfully enhance student learning outcomes
across multiple domains. Research by and with
education and technology companies also shows
that embedding Al features—such as interactive
question-and-answer opportunities—within
textbooks and other static, text-based teaching
and learning materials improves student learning
outcomes across a range of subjects, from biology
to history (Anderson 2025; LearnLM Team and
Google 2025; Microsoft 2025a; Pearson 2025). In
our study, 62% of teacher responses suggest that
Al can improve student learning by empowering
students. When asked which elements of learning
will gain most from Al, 35% of teacher responses
point to the two domains most traditionally
associated with education: reading and writing,
explored below.

SUPPORTING STUDENT READING,
ESPECIALLY FOR SECOND
LANGUAGE LEARNERS

Long before the widespread adoption of Al,
technology-enhanced learning has long provided a
more engaging and effective approach to reading
instruction and language instruction compared

to traditional methods (Burns 2021). Teachers

interviewed for this study enumerated several
elements of Al that lead to improved student
reading comprehension—particularly for those
learning a second language (L2 learners). Many

of these advantages directly address the linguistic
foundations of reading, including vocabulary
knowledge and syntactic understanding. Examples
include the capacity of Al to simplify vocabulary,
modify reading comprehension questions, and
adjust the Lexile (or reading difficulty) levels of
texts to match individual learners’ proficiency levels
appropriately.

However, the benefits of Al also extend to
important nonlinguistic factors that, while unrelated
to language per se, remain crucial for reading
comprehension. Teachers attest to the ability of Al
to engage students in the reading process, scaffold
learning strategies, extend reading time as needed,
utilize text-to-speech features, and create zones
of privacy and comfort where student reading
difficulties remain confidential.

While research on Al and reading comprehension
is scant at present, with studies of varying quality,
the evidence that does exist supports teacher
assertions regarding the capacity of Al to enhance
reading comprehension for L2 learners. A range of
studies, employing different methodologies, from

a spectrum of countries (Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
India, and the Philippines), student age cohorts,
and a range of Al tools (ITSs, personalized learning
platforms, and general-purpose Al platforms)
corroborate teacher claims (Alazemi 2024; Ali et al.
2023; Wangdi and Shimray 2025).

For example, a study from Kuwait appears to
show promising results for Al's impact on reading
comprehension and language-learning outcomes.
Eighty grade 9 female English-language learners
were selected through convenience sampling

and divided equally into treatment and control
groups comprising 40 students each. Researchers
administered pretests that were conducted to
assess their initial levels of English-language
comprehension. The treatment group received
Al-based instruction through a commercial

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 41
multimedia platform, Nearpod, while the control
group received traditional face-to-face instruction.
Both groups were taught 10 reading passages, and
post-tests were administered to measure reading
comprehension progress. While both groups
exhibited parity in their pretest reading scores,

the post-test showed a small improvement in the
intervention group, which scored 17.75 compared
to 16 for the control group. Statistical analysis
confirmed that this 1.75-point difference was
unlikely to have occurred by chance, indicating a
genuine if modest effect (Alazemi 2024).

The above findings, along with information provided
through teacher interviews, suggest that Al-based
personalized reading platforms may be particularly
effective in improving reading comprehension,
especially for L2 learners. Much of this success
appears linked to the ability of Al to match the level
of reading difficulty to individual student reading
abilities, analyze vast amounts of data to provide
targeted insights, feedback, and personalized
support to students, as well as to engage students
in more individualized ways (such as asking more
personalized questions), thus enhancing student
engagement and motivation. Personalization will be
discussed in the next benefit.

HELPING STUDENTS WITH
THE WRITING PROCESS

Al holds significant promise for enhancing writing
instruction and student outcomes across multiple
dimensions of the writing process when used to
amplify student learning rather than shortcut it.
Interviews with teachers and education experts,
alongside emerging research, suggest that Al
technologies can support both teachers and
students across the entire writing continuum-
when thoughtfully integrated into pedagogical
frameworks. This integration requires balancing
structured writing with more exploratory and
iterative practices and maintaining equilibrium
between human guidance and technological
support (Ferman et al. 2025; Deng et al. 2025; Guo
and Wang 2024; Dell'Acqua et al. 2023).

The use of Al tools to support student writing offers
three benefits:

Process-based writing support: When used as
part of a pedagogical approach that supports

(not replaces) student writing, Al technologies

can provide meaningful assistance in the writing
process. Teachers in our study report that students
are more motivated to write when using Al as a
scaffolding tool. This effective and motivational
support of Al can be particularly valuable for
students who have writing anxiety, who are weak
writers, or who have difficulty conceptualizing
writing topics or formulating written thoughts. It can
also supplement the traditional writing process in
schools which often focuses on assigning, rather
than teaching, writing.

Al can help students in all phases of the writing
process. During the ideation and conceptualization
phase, teachers report that Al can “spark creativity”
and help students overcome writer's block by
helping them "get unstuck" so they can develop
arguments and ideas. At the drafting stage, it

can help with organization, coherence, syntax,
semantics, and grammar. At the revision stage, Al
can support the editing and rewriting of ideas as
well as help with the mechanics of writing, including
punctuation, capitalization, and grammar.

Feedback: In Visible Learning, his groundbreaking
meta-analysis of over 50,000 education studies,
John Hattie highlighted the profound impact of
feedback on student learning outcomes, ranking it
among the most powerful educational interventions
in terms of average effect size (2010). Feedback
plays a particularly important role in supporting
students’ writing revision skills because it operates
on both an academic and an affective level,
helping students advance their writing skills while
cultivating the confidence needed to complete
writing tasks (Graham 2019; Meyer et al. 2024).
Yet high-quality feedback is time consuming, and
teachers can only support and guide a certain
number of students at any one time. To counter
this constraint, teachers are increasingly using
technologies like LLMs, as well Automated Written

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 42
Evaluation (AWE) systems, such as Grammarly, to
automate assessment and feedback. AWE systems
typically comprise two essential components: a
scoring engine that produces automatic scores, and
a feedback engine that delivers Automated Written
Corrective Feedback.

There is growing evidence that this array of Al tools
can be used to identify individual writing needs
and provide meaningful, personalized feedback to
improve both the process and product of writing.
Meyer et al. (2024) randomly assigned 200
German secondary school students to receive LLM
feedback after writing an essay draft in English (the
treatment group) while 250 students received no
LLM feedback on their essay (the control group).
Those receiving LLM feedback experienced very
modest statistically significant improvements in
text revision (d = 0.19). However, more notable
benefits occurred in how students felt about
writing (motivation and emotions) with medium
improvements in task motivation (d = 0.36), and
positive emotions (d = 0.34).

Though these impacts are quite modest, the
researchers advocate for the use of Al to create
feedback opportunities for students that would

be otherwise unavailable given teacher workload:
“Even if the beneficial effect of one single LLM-
generated feedback session is relatively small

for revision performance, the effects of further
feedback could cumulate for students because the
automation allows for multiple feedback cycles and
opportunities for practice” (Meyer et al. 2024, 7).

While Al demonstrates strengths in writing support,
research also emphasizes the complementary
nature of Al and human feedback. The University
of California at Davis's curricular intervention,
Peer & Al Review + Reflection (PAIRR), blends
both Al and human feedback to support students
during the writing process, following up with
critical reflection on the process and its impact
on their learning (University of California at Davis
2025). One study of 400 feedback instances

for the same essays (200 pieces of human-
generated formative feedback and 200 pieces

of Al-generated formative feedback) found that
human raters provided superior feedback in terms
of clarity, accuracy, supportive tone, and emphasis
on critical improvement areas, while Al feedback
excelled in delivering criteria-based evaluations
(Steiss et al. 2024). This research suggests that
optimal writing instruction may benefit from
hybrid vigor, leveraging and integrating both Al
and human feedback with Al (in formative early
drafts or instances where a well-trained teacher
is unavailable) but relying on human teachers for
more advanced stages of the writing process.

Improved writing outcomes: A number of
quantitative studies (Meyer et al. 2024; Guo

and Wang 2024) and qualitative ones (Meniado

et al. 2024; Wang 2025) point to the role of Al,
when used as “an active collaborator," to create
demonstrable improvements in student writing
(Meniado et al. 2024, 7). As with Al tools for
reading, these benefits are especially pronounced
for L2 learners and involve the production of
coherent texts with clear ideas, improved writing
flow, and discourse maturity that approaches
native-speaker-like quality, with significantly higher
indexes of lexical diversity reflected in both ideation
and sentence fluency. Al does this by accelerating
the writing process, easing cognitive load, fostering
new learning opportunities, providing immediate
feedback, and promoting positive feelings about
writing (Wang 2025).

While Al for writing studies examined in this study
focuses on LLMs, Al-based writing tools have
become increasingly popular writing supports.
Kaliisa et al.'s (2025) meta-analysis combined
findings from 41 separate studies involving nearly
5,000 secondary and post-secondary students

to examine the effectiveness of Al feedback on
student writing. The research determined that
students who received Al feedback learned

just as much as those who received traditional
teacher feedback, suggesting that Al feedback is
essentially equivalent to human feedback in terms
of measurable learning outcomes. Rather than
advocating for one approach over the other, the
researchers recommend that educators use both

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 43
strategically. This hybrid model leverages what Al
does well—providing quick, consistent feedback at
scale—while preserving what human teachers do
best—offering empathetic, nuanced, and deeply
contextual responses.

An important caveat in terms of examining the
effects of Al to help student writers focuses on the
type of Al used. Many studies examining Al tools in
education conflate fundamentally different types
of Al systems, such as rule-based approaches,
machine learning models, and generative Al.

This conflation is problematic because these
technologies operate on distinct principles and
offer qualitatively different capabilities.’ Treating
these diverse technologies as equivalent when
evaluating their educational impact obscures
important distinctions in how they function and
what they can reasonably accomplish in supporting
student learning.

CONCLUSION

Given the prevalence of reading and writing
difficulties among students, especially L2 learners,
the above research findings hold important
implications for teachers seeking to enhance
students’ reading skills. The unique linguistic
capabilities of Al tools such as LLMs can extend
support for struggling readers and writers who
require help in decoding, comprehending, and
communicating in the conventions and syntax of a
non-native language (Marzuki et al. 2023).

Helping struggling readers and writers is often a
major focus of education systems everywhere.
Many schools invest heavily in specialized literacy
intervention programs, additional textbooks, outside
specialists, and remedial software. Reading and
writing assistance is often highly labor intensive.
Though far more research is needed, Al tools may
potentially reduce the intensive one-on-one human
support traditionally required for struggling readers
and writers, particularly L2 learners or those

with disabilities, and might serve as an integral
element of structured literacy interventions. From
a human resource and financial perspective, these

developments could alleviate financial and human
resource shortages in education systems struggling
with both.

Benefit 4: Al can
tailor learning to
each student's
needs

Education is often maligned for its “one size fits

all approach” to teaching and learning. For study
participants, Al is changing that paradigm through
two primary mechanisms: personalized learning
programs and ITSs, which they rank as an important
benefit of Al.

PERSONALIZED LEARNING PROGRAMS

Personalized learning tailors instruction to each
student's strengths, needs, and interests while
providing choice, voice, and flexibility in reaching
learning outcomes (Slocum 2016). Although
personalization doesn't require technology, the
logistical burdens of addressing every student's
unique needs means that teachers increasingly
employ technology, such as Al-powered platforms
using LLMs or chatbots to adapt curricula,
pacing, and learning environments to individual
student profiles.

Teachers in the U.S., Nigeria, India, Singapore,
and South Korea interviewed for this study report
leveraging Al primarily for strategic adaptations
of materials, instruction, and assessments; the
tools provide immediate, responsive feedback.
These practitioner observations align with research
demonstrating that Al technologies facilitate
adaptive pacing by responding to individual
trajectories, enable continuous assessment with
real-time adjustments, enhance engagement
through dynamic experiences, and expand
opportunities for student questioning (Niemi et al.
2023; Ferman et al. 2021).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 44
Survey data from Cambium Learning Group (2024)
confirms this trend: 56% of U.S. teachers currently
leverage Al for personalized experiences, 52%
employ these tools for real-time performance
tracking and feedback, and 50% use Al-powered
platforms specifically for developing critical thinking
skills, suggesting that personalization extends
beyond basic remediation to encompass higher-
order cognitive development.

As discussed in Benefit 1, personalized learning
can meet diverse learning needs of large student
populations with constrained educational resources
while offering high-dosage tutoring at low costs
(Burns 2021, 37). Personalized systems do this by
providing just-in-time feedback, recommendations,
explanations, and examples, thereby improving
students’ conceptual development (Ng et al.

2024, 1333).

Major, Francis, and Tsapali’s 2021 meta-analysis of
16 randomized controlled trials across five low- to
middle-income countries involving 53,029 learners
aged 6-15 years found that technology-supported
personalized learning had a statistically significant
positive effect size of 0.18 on learning outcomes
(p = 0.001).

Critically, their meta-regression revealed that
adaptive approaches, which adjust to learners’
levels, produced significantly greater impact (an
effect size of 0.35, considered moderate to strong)
than those only linking to learners’ interests or
providing personalized feedback and assessment
(Major et al. 2021, 1935). This demonstrates that
adaptive personalization—where instructional
content, pacing, or difficulty dynamically adjusts
based on current knowledge level or ability—
produces substantially stronger learning outcomes
than other forms of personalization.

INTELLIGENT TUTORING SYSTEMS:
EVOLUTION AND EVIDENCE

In the 1980s, Benjamin Bloom identified education's
"2 sigma problem"—namely, that students receiving
one-to-one tutoring scored two standard deviations

higher than those without tutoring. The “problem”
was making such intensive support scalable and
economically feasible (Bloom 1984). Over the
past several decades, technology, in the form of
computer-based and online tutoring, has been
harnessed to provide a scalable, cost-effective
alternative to in-person tutoring.

ITSs represent the most common Al educational
applications, with millions of users worldwide
(Burns 2021). These systems have evolved from
early rule-based expert systems using predictive
algorithms and knowledge tracing to sophisticated
platforms incorporating Al for natural dialogue,
dynamic problem generation, and affective data
analysis (du Boulay 2016; Buckley et al. 2021).
ITSs typically employ cognitive models grounded
in learning science theory, using techniques like
model tracing or constraint-based modeling to
diagnose student knowledge states and provide
targeted instructional interventions.

Research consistently demonstrates their
effectiveness. Kulik and Fletcher's (2016) meta-
review of 50 studies concluded ITSs can “match
the success” of human tutoring, while Nickow
et al. (2020) found an average effect size of
0.37 standard deviations across 96 randomized
controlled trials—equivalent to moving students
from the 50th to 65th percentile. Benefits prove
strongest in foundational subjects and are
particularly helpful for traditionally underserved
populations, including learners with disabilities
(Kasneci et al. 2023).

While recent ITSs have begun incorporating
machine learning methods—including neural
networks and natural language processing—to
improve student dialogue and predict learning
trajectories, most deployed systems with
established research evidence still depend on
structured, rule-based cognitive architectures from
the 1980s and 1990s (Garcia-Méndez 2025). The
introduction of LLMs marks a significant new phase
in computer-based tutoring, expanding possibilities
for flexible conversations and content generation.
Granted, research supporting large-scale,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

45
classroom-tested implementations of Al tutoring
programs remains limited, lagging behind traditional
ITSs that have demonstrated effectiveness through
decades of rigorous evaluation (Nye et al. 2023, 2;
Jiang et al. 2025). However, three recent studies
offer early evidence of the considerable promise
that Al-enhanced tutoring systems may hold.

In the first, researchers conducted a randomized
controlled trial with 194 undergraduate physics
students at Harvard University, comparing learning
outcomes and student perceptions between an

Al tutor and active learning classroom instruction
(Kestin et al. 2025). Both instructional approaches
were designed using identical pedagogical best
practices. Students alternated between conditions
across two weekly lessons on surface tension
and fluid flow, completing pre- and post-tests

to measure content mastery alongside surveys
assessing their learning experience.

Students using the Al tutor demonstrated
significantly higher learning gains in less time than
those in active learning classrooms. The Al group
achieved a median post-test score of 4.5 compared
to 3.5 for the classroom group—representing
more than double the learning gains relative to

the combined pre-test baseline of 2.75. Students
also reported feeling more engaged and motivated
when working with the Al tutor. The authors
conclude that students interacting with the Al tutor
at home “learn significantly more than when they
engage with the same content during an in-class
active learning lesson, while spending less time
on task," suggesting substantial potential for Al
tutors in authentic educational settings (Kestin et
al. 2025, 4).

The second study, a 2024 World Bank trial in
Nigeria found that Microsoft Copilot (generative
pre-trained transform, version 4 [GPT-4]) improved
first-year secondary students’ English skills by
0.23 standard deviations and digital literacy by 0.31
standard deviations—learning gains equivalent to
1.5 to 2 years of regular schooling in just six weeks.
Researchers noted that the program succeeded
because it complemented the efforts of teachers

rather than replacing them (Di Simone et al. 2025).
Finally, Stanford's Tutor CoPilot, which provides
Al-guided support to human tutors, increased
student mastery rates by 4 percentage points
overall and 9 percentage points for students with
lower-rated human tutors (Wang et al. 2025). At

a cost of only $20 per tutor annually, this may
represent an important step in solving Bloom's
Sigma 2 problem.

CONCLUSION: THE IMPORTANCE
OF “HYBRID VIGOR”

Despite promising outcomes, Al-powered
personalization raises substantial concerns among
our study participants. The primary apprehension
centers on equity: personalization may also function
as sophisticated tracking, placing students on
limited pathways where basic skills are reinforced
to the detriment of more important competencies.
Al's predictive analytics risk creating self-fulfilling
prophecies, whereby algorithmic predictions based
on early performance or demographic factors
shape educational opportunities in ways that
confirm biases. Several Delphi panelists expressed
worry that the poorest education systems will
employ Al to teach students while students in
wealthy education systems will be taught by Al—
and human teachers.

Design limitations compound these worries.
Because of ease of design, many Al-driven tools
employ outdated theories of learning, such as
behaviorism, thus limiting both what and how
students learn (Chen et al. 2025; Bali 2024). While
Al can produce vast quantities of materials leveled
to a student's learning ability, it often lacks the
nuanced judgment needed for complex tasks like
teaching reading comprehension or writing—where,
in the words of one teacher, “human insight is
irreplaceable.”

The real danger lies in using tutoring and
personalization systems for substitution versus
supplementation. When systems position
learners as isolated individuals interacting with
platforms, they automate rather than augment

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 46
learning, eliminating the embodied experiences
and relationships so critical to human learning
(Cukurova 2024). Al cannot discern whether
student slowness indicates deep thinking, peer
collaboration, fatigue, or disengagement—a
contextual understanding that good educators
develop through daily interaction.

Furthermore, the relational and affective dimensions
crucial to genuine personalization—formative
feedback, motivational scaffolding, shared goal
setting—remain beyond algorithmic capability.
Students derive motivation from interpersonal
connections; if teachers become sidelined in favor
of Al tools, in the words of one Delphi panelist,
students may feel devalued as “algorithmic data
points rather than individuals whom teachers
genuinely care about.”

The evidence suggests Al-based personalization
and tutoring work most effectively through
human-Al collaboration. One teacher explains what
this looks like in practice: “The students come back
to me in the small group rotation. The personalized
platform has helped them with capitalization,
punctuation, and grammar. Now | can help them
extend their thinking further.”

This “hybrid vigor" ensures that technology
augments, rather than replaces, the human
dimensions of meaningful learning. At its best,
Al-powered personalization helps each student
feel their learning is meaningful while providing
teachers with feedback on student progress to
enable tailored instruction. The most sophisticated
Al-powered methods require a strong teacher-
student dialogue to succeed, maintaining the
relational foundation essential to education while
leveraging technology's capacity for scale and
individualization.

°
Benefit 5: Al can
e
extend learning
°
to neurodivergent
students and
°
students with
° opens
disabilities
Education systems often struggle to meet the
unique needs and strengths of all students.
When schools are not accessible and inclusive,
participation and learning become especially
challenging for students with disabilities and
neurodivergent learners. Children with disabilities
are nearly 50% more likely to have never attended
school. Of the 240 million children with disabilities
worldwide, more than 90% in low- and middle-
income countries lack access to the assistive
technology they need (United Nations Sustainable
Development Group 2024). Since most schools are
designed for neurotypical children, neurodivergent
students—such as those with dyslexia, attention

deficit hyperactivity disorder, and autism—are often
left out (Teach Access 2025).

Al can help education systems better support
children with special needs by expanding the
capacity and availability of assistive technology.
Globally, more than 2.5 billion people, including
both adults and children, need assistive devices
such as wheelchairs, hearing aids, or apps that
support communication and cognition. Yet nearly
one billion lack access, particularly in low- and
middle-income countries where availability meets
as little as 3% of need (World Health Organization
and UNICEF 2022). As we examine next, Al offers
promising solutions to address this accessibility
gap through applications ranging from adaptive
assessments to innovative delivery mechanisms.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 47
SUPPORTING NEURODIVERGENT
STUDENTS

Since the development of the first chatbot—ELIZA—
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology

(MIT) in the 1960s, advances in machine learning
and natural language processing have produced
increasingly sophisticated conversational

agents. Social chatbots or artificial companions,
including companion and emotional chatbots,
which will be discussed in Section IV, engage in
empathetic conversations with humans, deliberately
incorporating anthropomorphic features to

promote the development of social skills. These
design elements strategically cultivate emotional
connections between users and technology,
creating more intuitive and emotionally resonant
interactions (Chaturvedi et al. 2023).

Interviews with teachers and research data
suggest these applications particularly appeal to
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Youth with ASD often experience significantly more
social difficulties and maintain fewer friendships
compared to typically-developed peers. Learners
with ASD may gravitate toward online chatbots
because they simulate real-life communication
scenarios, providing a safe space for rehearsing
interactions without risks of judgment or rejection
(Franze et al. 2023; Ali et al. 2023; Zhao et al.
2025). One teacher in England illustrates these
findings with an example from her classroom:

I've got a lot of neurodivergent children.
And they struggle with timing, pacing,

and particularly structure. Once they've
been shown like, okay, if you use these
prompts, you can get an Al to help you plan
or structure something, they find that very
helpful. And they like the fact that they can
ask as many questions as they want.

Technology can also be helpful in supporting
students with dyslexia. Approximately 15-20% of
the global population has dyslexia and it is often
underdiagnosed (International Dyslexia Association,
n.d.). Without relevant support, students

with dyslexia struggle to learn in text-heavy
environments like schools because they struggle
with things such as spelling, letter order confusion,
slow reading, handwriting, and phonological
processing (Kuerban et al. 2025).

For example, Let Al Read First (LARF) is an
Al-annotated text approach designed to enhance
reading abilities of individuals with dyslexia. The
system uses preset prompts to guide GPT-4 in
processing original text and incorporating HTML
tags to manipulate text display through bolding,
highlighting, italics, font color changes, and size
adjustments, while textual content remains entirely
unchanged.

Zhao et al. (2025) conducted a between-subjects
experiment with 150 participants who self-reported
having dyslexia or suspected undiagnosed dyslexia,
all with English as their mother tongue. Participants
were randomly assigned to three conditions:
Control (unmodified text), Conventional (Bionic
Reading, which bolds the first few characters of
words), and LARF (GPT-4 annotated text). They
were assessed on reading functions including
comprehension, accuracy, and retrieval. LARF

was helpful for participants with severe dyslexia,
with improvements in reading performance such
as retrieval, recall and comprehension being more
pronounced in those experiencing more significant
challenges.

Other approaches integrate augmented reality (AR)
and Al. ReadSmart, for example, is an application
that captures text from real-world environments
using AR devices, processes text using optical
character recognition (OCR), summarizes and
generates educational content with Al, and displays
this content in an interactive AR environment
(Kuerban et al. 2025, 164). AR is a semi-immersive
interface that allows a combination of real-

world elements captured through a camera with
multimedia elements such as text, images, and
video (Burns 2023b).

Researchers examined how AR and Al could be
integrated to design an educational system that

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 48
effectively supports students with dyslexia. They
subjected the platform to extensive performance
testing across 100 trials. User testing via surveys
included 45 professors/teachers and 258 students
in the first iteration, and 40 participants including
4 professors/teachers, 25 students, and 13
professionals in the second iteration. The platform
received an overall satisfaction rating of 3.9 out of
5, with particularly positive reception for text-to-
speech and OCR accuracy (Kuerban et al. 2025).

Both examples point to broader implications for
integrating Al with assistive technologies to create
multimodal learning environments that address the

specific challenges faced by students with dyslexia.

SUPPORTING STUDENTS
WITH DISABILITIES

Many learners with disabilities rely on assistive
technologies—hardware, software, digital
content, apps, and peripherals modified to assist
individuals with disabilities. Different assistive
technologies serve various support functions:
adapted trackballs and alternate keyboards help
students with motor impairments; screen readers
like JAWS (Job Access With Speech), digital talking
books, and voice-to-text software assist visually
impaired students; communication apps, speech
synthesizers, and sign-language resources help
students unable to use verbal speech.

Most powerful perhaps may be the use of Al

for those with speech impairments. The human
voice has often been referenced as our “acoustic
fingerprint’—a unique human identifier (Costello
2000). Advances in Al combined with innovative
assistive technologies can help both children and
adult learners reclaim or preserve their voices.

For many adults living with conditions such as
aphasia, ALS or laryngeal cancer, voice-cloning
technologies can create synthetic replicas of
their original voice, increasingly in ways that are
indistinguishable from natural voices. Voice-
banking techniques—where a user records their
voice in advance for subsequent use—can create

personalized synthetic voices that can be used with
communication devices (John Costello, personal
communication, November 12, 2025).

For children with speech impairments, voice-bank-
ing and emerging synthetic-voice systems can
provide a personalized synthetic voice that pre-
serves elements of the child’s vocal character. They
can be used with Augmentative and Alternative
Communication (AAC) devices as children grow and
their needs evolve (though the banked or synthe-
sized voice cannot be aged as the child matures).
AAC is another major recipient of Al-enhanced
access. Some communication apps now integrate
Al features such as predictive text to reduce key-
strokes, or speech-recognition modules tailored

to non-standard speech patterns arising from
motor-speech disorders, thereby helping users who
cannot speak verbally to communicate through
synthesized voice output (Teach Access 2025).

Beyond voice restoration and AAC, Al-powered
tools are broadening communication access in
multiple ways: advanced text-to-speech and
speech-to-text systems with predictive typing are
aiding written communication; voice assistants
support visually-impaired learners in navigating
digital libraries; augmented-reality apps are in
development to translate printed text into sign-
language for deaf students; and speech-enabled,
socially assistive robots are being piloted to provide
structured interaction opportunities for learners
with ASD (Miao et al. 2021, Burns 2021).

CONCLUSION

Finally, and critically, for instructional designers
creating accessible online learning experiences, Al
provides substantial support: generating alternative
text for images, performing automated accessibility
auditing using readability metrics, automating
contrast checking for colorblind learners, verifying
appropriate fonts for visually impaired students,
and generating closed captions for video content.
One small field experiment found that when novice
designers alternated between using Al assistance
and working independently, Al-assisted lessons

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 49
received significantly higher quality scores on
half the assignments and never scored lower on
average, suggesting Al's potential to elevate both
accessibility and overall quality of online course
design (Moore et al. 2025).

Benefit 6:
Al can advance
assessment

Al can support the analysis of multimodal
portfolios, texts, audio, video, images, and
offer insights that help teachers provide more
meaningful feedback.

— Delphi panelist

We can use [virtual reality] and Al to assess the
capacity to do, which is ultimately more helpful
and valuable in the working world...aviation
has been doing [this] for decades in flight
simulations.

— Delphi panelist

And not only did [the Al assessment platform]
mark [the exam] for her, it then highlighted

the areas that she needed to work on...From

a student's point of view, it's honing in on her
learning [and] what she still needs to work on. |
was kind of blown away with that.

— Teacher

As the quotations above demonstrate, assessment
is both critical to and inseparable from teaching
and learning. Al's potential to transform assessment
practices is one of its most significant contributions
to education. While many teachers interviewed

for this study shared their struggles with Al

and assessment around issues of plagiarism

and cheating—consequently adopting Al-safe
assessments, such as oral or paper-and-pencil
exams—other teachers have embraced Al's
potential for assessments that are more accurate
and accessible, as well as capable of tracking a
wide range of competencies. Three dimensions

illustrate how Al is potentially transforming
assessment: automation, effectiveness, and
expansiveness.

AUTOMATION

For teachers interviewed for this study, Al

has significantly advanced the automation of
assessment across multiple dimensions, including
exam construction, test item generation, automatic
grading, and the recording and reporting of data
at scale. This automation addresses a persistent
challenge that many national assessment systems
have faced: the difficulty of gathering sufficient
data to draw reliable conclusions without creating
undue burdens on teachers, imposing excessive
costs on education systems, or delaying results that
learners need in a timely manner (Burns 2023b).

The automation of assessments through Al offers
three particularly valuable educational benefits.
First, it lowers the cost differential of testing,
because automated processes require significantly
less time to score and store assessment data.
Second, it enables a quick turnaround of
assessment information to teachers and students,
which allows educators to assess student
performance at a much more granular and detailed
level than was previously feasible. Third, automated
systems can provide more reliable scoring and
valid data interpretation, reducing the variability
and potential bias that can occur with human
scoring (Burns 2023b). Together, these capabilities
represent one of the most significant contributions
Al makes to education: the ability to reduce manual
labor so that essential tasks are performed more
efficiently, at higher volumes, more objectively,
and at a scale that would be impossible to achieve
through traditional methods alone.

EFFECTIVENESS AND EXPANSIVENESS

Until Al, technology's greatest benefit for
assessment was in terms of efficiency—
automating and scaling the delivery of
assessment and reducing the labor and cost of
designing assessments. Arguably, technology

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 50
did less to address effectiveness, particularly
good assessment design, which has long been
challenging for teachers creating their own
assessments. Developing good assessment
questions, particularly those that assess not
simply declarative and procedural knowledge but
conceptual, higher-level thinking skills, aptitudes,
and a full range of cognitive and affective skills
has typically required highly skilled content
experts, psychometricians, designers, and
assessment experts.

Al is changing assessment in fundamental ways.
While Al tools like LLMs and teacher productivity
platforms can streamline the creation of valid,
reliable, and transparent assessments, their more
transformative potential lies in expanding what
assessment can measure and how. Evidence from
studies, in addition to discussions with teachers and
Delphi panelists, suggests that Al enables entirely
new forms of formative, process-based, multimodal
assessments that analyze students’ work as they
progress through learning tasks, tracking a wider
range of competencies than traditional approaches
allow (Curriculum Associates 2025). This emerging
paradigm supports more diverse pedagogical
approaches and can accomplish this expansion in
several ways.

First, through its ability to diversify assessment, Al
makes it possible to administer multiple tests and
measure student learning in multiple formats—via
quizzes, discussions, projects, performance-based
assessment, and e-portfolios—thus assessing
knowledge and facts as well as higher-level skills,
such as students’ ability to analyze, synthesize,
and evaluate ideas, arguments, and information. In
this way, it becomes possible to assess a student's
learning progress as well as their process and
product (Delphi panelists). The administration

of multimodal forms of assessment can capture

a wider range of indicators from multiple data
sources to assess the strengths and weaknesses
of each student's approach (Blikstein and Worsley
2016; Di Mitri et al. 2018; Chango et al. 2021;
Delphi panelists). These capabilities enable Al to
provide personalized feedback, facilitate student

self-reflection through interactive dashboards,
illuminate collaboration patterns and socioemotional
dynamics typically invisible to educators, and offer
real-time guidance to both students and teachers
(Deng et al. 2025; Delphi panelists).

Second, adaptive assessment addresses the
reality that students in any classroom occupy
different points along the learning trajectory. These
assessments automatically adjust difficulty based
on student performance, administering easier
tasks to those who struggle and more challenging
ones to those who succeed. Unlike traditional
assessments that report results against common
content standards, adaptive assessments measure
students against a learning continuum, estimating
where each individual has reached regardless of
age or grade level (Masters 2021). While adaptive
assessments have long preceded generative

Al, Al deepens their utility by selecting the most
appropriate next question for each student, more
accurately estimating ability by drawing on diverse
datasets that handle uncertainty and detect
anomalies, and providing real-time, actionable
feedback that helps teachers and learners identify
strengths, address misconceptions, and plan next
steps (Ihichr et al. 2024; Cobing 2025).

Next, the natural language processing capabilities
of Al, particularly LLMs, can enable more flexible,
ongoing, and interactive assessment methods
(Delphi panelist). For example, Al makes possible
the use of longer free-text or audio responses,
facilitating in-depth assessment of students’
knowledge, mental models, and reasoning abilities
beyond what conventional non-Al assessments
typically achieve. Teachers can engage students in
extended question-and-answer sessions where Al
analyzes responses to identify areas of proficiency
and focuses on demonstrated knowledge gaps

or ambiguous understanding. The flexibility
inherent in Al systems allows for sophisticated
pattern recognition that can identify, assess, and
address common student misconceptions through
detailed analysis of student responses and close
examination of language use. Thus, the natural
language processing capabilities of Al may facilitate

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 51
more responsive and accurate assessments that
adapt to individual student needs while maintaining
rigorous evaluation standards (Delphi panelists).

Finally, combined with tools such as VR, Al can
potentially assess students’ capacity to perform in
realistic contexts, which may help educators better
connect students’ knowledge acquisition to their
knowledge application. Immersive environments,
in combination with Al, can assess competencies
ranging from critical thinking and problem-solving
to communication skills within contextualized
scenarios (Burns 2023b). They can enable iterative
practice in, for example, practicing job interviews
with Al-enabled avatars that respond in real

time, creating consistently high-quality learning
experiences previously available only to students
with access to expert mentors and shifting from
assessment practices prioritizing precision and
ranking to complex, project-based assessments
measuring agency and critical thinking across
authentic scenarios. This VR-Al integration can
allow educators to assess not merely what students
know but what they can actually do in professional
contexts, moving beyond information transfer

to practical competency demonstration (Delphi
panelist).

SUPPORT THROUGH PREDICTION

Beyond classroom assessment, Al’s capacity to
identify patterns in vast datasets enables early
identification of students who need support before
challenges become crises. Researchers from
NOVA University Lisbon analyzed the academic
achievement of all 110,627 public secondary
school students in Portugal in the 2014-2015
academic year to predict those at risk of failing.
Researchers compared multiple Al methods (for
example, random forests, artificial neural networks,
etc.) against traditional logistic regression, using
data from the beginning of each academic year

to predict outcomes at year's end (Cruz-Jesus et
al. 2020).

The Al methods demonstrated superior
performance. Random forests correctly identified

the 5% of students most likely to fail with the
highest accuracy (87%), while artificial neural
networks correctly classified 80% of at-risk
students compared to 49% for logistic regression.
Researchers noted that these results “clearly
demonstrate that Al approaches manifestly
outperform traditional methods" for identifying
students at risk of dropping out (Cruz-Jesus et

al. 2020, 7). However, they cautioned that Al's
technical capacity must be balanced against
pedagogical wisdom, ethical considerations around
educational equity, and the reality that prediction is
not destiny.

CONCLUSION

Identifying at-risk students represents only the first
step—the critical challenges lie in determining how
to help them.

This is where generative Al, a fundamentally
different technology from the Al models used in
the Portugal study, could play a transformative
role. By synthesizing each student's risk profile
with contextual information and evidence-based
practices, generative Al could translate these
statistical predictions into actionable interventions:
personalized support recommendations,
individualized learning plans, family communication
materials, and specific resources tailored to each
student's circumstances. This integration could
transform early warning systems from diagnostic
tools that identify problems into comprehensive
support frameworks that guide educators

toward targeted solutions, helping ensure that
early identification leads to timely, appropriate
intervention.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 52
\v) POTENTIAL OUTCOME 2:
Al can diminish learning if overused
with no guardrails

As noted, Al's educational benefits are manifold. For many teachers interviewed, Al's capacity to save
time, simplify tasks, and optimize work processes has freed them to provide more individualized student
support, feedback, and tutoring. They report that Al has reduced bias and increased objectivity in grading,
enabled the creation of differentiated content based on student interest and reading levels, and helped
teachers interact more effectively with students who learn in nontraditional ways.

Al, particularly the LLMs most prevalent in the educational contexts examined in this study, is an
extraordinarily powerful and versatile set of productivity tools that can effortlessly generate diverse
artifacts and outputs. Yet this very source of Al's strength also constitutes its greatest risk. This tension
emerged clearly in research findings. For study participants—experts, teachers, parents and students—the
risks of Al far outweigh its benefits: 56% of all responses point to Al's harms versus 44% to its benefits.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Figure 7 displays the proportion of “harms” or
“tisks" of Al identified by study participants:
experts, teachers, students and parents.

As Figure 7 illustrates, Al poses risks across
multiple dimensions. These include developmental
risks such as undermining students’ cognitive
development, which includes content-based skills,
critical thinking, and durable or transversal skills;
social-emotional risks including dependency,
isolation, and mental health impacts; privacy and
data risks involving surveillance and security
breaches; risks related to misinformation, bias,
and inaccuracy in Al outputs; relational risks that
erode student-teacher trust and replace human

interaction; and academic integrity concerns
around authenticity and plagiarism. Further,
Al's benefits accrue mainly to students in well-
resourced countries or education systems, thus
exacerbating existing inequities.

The risks result from a combination of internal and
external factors. Internal factors relate to the design
of many Al tools and platforms, which encourage
attachment and prolonged engagement while failing
to provide cognitive scaffolds, adequate guardrails,
or age-appropriate protections.

FIGURE 7

Risks identified by study participants
100%

80%
60%
40%
20%

0%:

Students Parents

Teachers

I Undermine cognitive
development

1 impede social and
emotional development

1) Degrade trust
Il Threaten safety
Il Increase dependence

I Deepen equity divides

Experts

In this figure: teachers n = 117; experts = 72; students = 68; parents = 41.?
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 54
Al and early childhood development

While this study focuses on school-aged children, it is important to recognize the potential risks of
integrating Al into interactions with very young children. As Al becomes embedded in toys and com-
panies experiment with LLMs for early childhood, child development experts urge caution (Roche et
al. 2025). As Dana Suskind, professor at the University of Chicago reminds us: “relationship maps laid
down early have implications for how you interact with other humans for the rest of your life,” (Dana
Suskind, personal communication, September 15, 2025). Al could influence the attachment process
between infants or young children and their parents or caregivers—a foundation for healthy devel-
opment and learning. Experts in our study are particularly concerned about vulnerable children with
limited access to quality childcare and the temptation to use Al as a substitute for human interaction
Far more research and policy attention is needed to understand how Al may affect child development,

especially for children from birth to age three.

External factors stem from the context and

manner in which students use Al. Here the
potential for harm is most acute when Al is used
with minimal adult supervision and guidance,
when AI replaces rather than enhances thinking
and human interaction, and when students lack
adequate preparation for productive Al use.

These circumstances reflect the current reality for
many students who encounter Al across multiple
platforms throughout their daily lives—often outside
school settings and increasingly beyond the reach
of teachers and parents who might help them
navigate these tools thoughtfully. Compounding
these contextual risks are pedagogical approaches
that encourage Al substitution rather than
enhancement, issues of student motivation and
maturity, concerns about academic integrity, and
the absence of clear guidance and protection
around appropriate and safe use.

We turn now to a discussion of these risks.

Risk 1: Al can
undermine
students’ cognitive
development

Students can’t reason. They can’t think. They
can’t solve problems.
— Teacher

If students can just replace their actual learning
and their ability to communicate what they
know with something that’s produced outside of
them and get credit for it, what purpose do they
have to actually learn?

— Teacher

Al is the fast food of education.
— Expert

It’s easy. You don’t need to (use) your brain.
— Student

We have long known about technology's impact
on brain physiology (Carr 2010). In The Anxious

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Generation (2024), Jonathan Haidt points to
“great rewiring" of the brains of children and youth
because of social media. Al continues this pattern.

The data presented here points to what might be
termed a “great unwiring" of students’ cognitive
capacities. The overuse, and even the routine use,
of Al is fundamentally and negatively reshaping
how students approach learning; this has profound
implications for cognitive engagement, the
development of practical skills, and existential
questions about human purpose and agency.
Study participants identified this threat to student
learning as the greatest risk posed by Al. Fifty-
seven percent of all responses discussing potential
harms focused on threats to students’ “cognitive
development.” This concern resonates across
cohorts, appearing in 65% of student responses,
46% of parent responses, and 44% of teacher
responses addressing Al's potential harms.

The data presented here points
to what might be termed a
“great unwiring” of students’
cognitive capacities.

Cognitive development is defined here as “the
growth and maturation of thinking processes
of all kinds, including perceiving, remembering,
concept formation, problem solving, imagining,
and reasoning” (American Psychological
Association 2018).

The concern among study participants is that the
routine use and overuse of Al do not simply harm
student's cognitive development—both actively
place children at risk of cognitive decline.

The risk stems from what study participants view
as a straightforward progression: Al tools are
more likely to foster dependence. As students

increasingly use these tools, and “offload” an
increasing amount of their cognitive tasks to these
tools, a positive feedback loop emerges where
they see positive results in terms of grades and

in time and effort saved. These outcomes then
create increased dependence on Al tools, increased
“cognitive offloading,” and increased “cognitive
decline.” Cognitive decline, typically used to refer
to the cognitive impairment associated with an
unhealthy aging brain, has other synonyms used
by researchers studying the impacts of offloading
intellectual functions to technology—“cognitive
atrophy” and “cognitive debt” (Gardony et al. 2015;
Risko and Gilbert 2016; Kosmyna et al. 2025).

Though the terms differ, cognitive decline, atrophy,
and debt essentially represent the effects of users’
repeatedly turning to external systems like LLMs
to replace the mental effort normally needed

for independent thinking. As we will discuss,

this decline has long-term consequences—
“diminished critical inquiry, increased vulnerability
to manipulation, decreased creativity,” and “risk
internalizing shallow or biased perspectives”
(Kosmyna et al. 2025, 141).

EDUCATION’S UNIQUE SUSCEPTIBILITY
TO AI-RELATED RISKS

At its core, Al is an extraordinary set of powerful
productivity tools. In many fields using All, its
productive and analytical outcomes are striking.
Scientists have used Al to accelerate the process
of mapping human proteins enabling new medical
treatments to be developed (Tunyasuvunakool et
al. 2021). Public health researchers have used Al to
identify viruses in wastewater, thereby preventing
outbreaks of epidemics (Zhuang et al. 2025).

But the people harnessing these powerful Al

tools are professional adults with fully matured
brains. They have already developed sophisticated
metacognitive and critical thinking skills that
undergird their approach to their work. They have
deep expertise in their domains, and the cognitive
flexibility that comes with such expertise, allowing
them to navigate, evaluate, assimilate, reject, and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 56
strategically use the information Al generates.

A professional using ChatGPT experiences
different cognitive demands than a secondary
school student using ChatGPT. Professionals are
harnessing Al's enormous productive capacity to
optimize work that they often already know how
to do, accelerating processes they have mastered
from years of repeated professional practice and
reflection. They are therefore more likely to use Al
as a cognitive partner.

For students, the situation is fundamentally
reversed. They are not mini-professionals.

Their brains are developing, undergoing crucial
processes of neural pruning and strengthening that
depend on repeated cognitive effort and struggle.
They lack the metacognitive skills, critical thinking
abilities, and neurobiological maturity of adults.
School exists precisely to build these capacities
through sustained engagement with challenging
material. The productive power of Al tools, which
amplifies adult expertise, can undermine this
developmental goal when placed in the hands

of learners. Cognitive development requires the
effortful processing, mistake-making, and problem-
solving that Al too easily circumvents and that many
students are willing to bypass. Used liberally, Al is
not a cognitive partner; it is a cognitive surrogate.
It does not accelerate children’s cognitive
development—it diminishes it.

To understand how this process plays out for
students, we present the study findings.

COGNITIVE OFFLOADING

Human beings have long used tools to improve
task performance, including outsourcing cognitive
processes (Osiurak et al. 2018). We organize
phone numbers in contact lists and use phone-
based mapping services to steer us toward a
desired destination. By “cognitively offloading”
the mental processing requirements of a task to
physical or digital tools, we reduce extraneous, or
unnecessary, cognitive load so we can focus on
more important tasks (Risko and Gilbert 2016; Wahn
et al. 2023).

The rationale for cognitive offloading emerges from
the constraints of human memory. Sweller (1988)
explains that working memory can hold only limited
information at any given time, making productive
offloading essential. Al tools extend this principle
by “automating routine tasks, allowing users to
delegate memory, attention, and decision-making
processes to technological systems” (Gerlich
2025, 14).

Used liberally, Al is not a
cognitive partner; itis a
cognitive surrogate. It does not
accelerate children's cognitive
development—it diminishes it.

All cognitive offloading involves inherent tradeoffs.
Typing eliminates the need for handwriting;
calculators diminish requirements for mental
arithmetic (Bastani et al. 2024). Educators have
generally accepted these forms of cognitive
outsourcing as worthwhile exchanges that free
students to engage in more meaningful and
complex intellectual tasks.

Yet Al has turbocharged cognitive offloading. LLMs,
for example, offer capabilities extending far beyond
traditional productivity tools into domains previously
requiring uniquely human cognitive processes.

As Al tools continuously improve, they become
increasingly seductive to use, creating what
amounts to an existential danger to learning itself.
Research reveals a strong positive correlation (r =
+0.72) between excessive Al tool use and cognitive
offloading, with younger participants who relied
heavily on Al tools scoring lower on critical thinking
skills than their older counterparts (Gerlich 2025).

For teachers interviewed in this study, cognitive
offloading is not merely a risk but a present

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 57
reality. The majority of their responses regarding
Al's negative impacts focused on the harms

of cognitive offloading. The problem emerges
when cognitive offloading eliminates not just
extraneous load but germane cognitive load—the
mental effort, knowledge construction, and deep
processing essential for learning (Sweller 1988).
Because humans have evolved to cognitively
offload, students naturally take shortcuts when
given the opportunity. As cognitive scientist
Daniel Willingham observes in his essay, Why
Don't Students Like School? “Unless the cognitive
conditions are right, we will avoid thinking”
(Willingham 2021, 1). For teachers we interviewed,
they see Willingham’s observation confirmed in
their classrooms as students become consumers,
not producers, of information.

When students depend excessively on Al tools
that replace core learning processes—when “Al
does the work” for them, as teachers frequently
reported—essential skills begin to atrophy
(Gardony et al. 2015; Bozkurt et al. 2024; Fan et al.
2024). While some compromised skills may seem
marginal, such as overreliance on spell checkers or
calculators, others are foundational: the ability to
read, write, and think critically.

The twin drivers of cognitive offloading:
Al ubiquity and school design

The incentives driving students’ cognitive
offloading with Al operate at personal, systemic,
and environmental levels. While cognitive offloading
may stem from various motivations—opportunism,
ignorance, lack of confidence, boundary testing,
situational demands, or even good intentions—two
particularly salient and interconnected drivers
emerge: the incentive structures surrounding Al use
and the transactional paradigm of schooling that
privileges task completion and written output.

First, the widespread availability and integration of
Al technology creates an environment conducive
to the unreflective use that drives a lot of cognitive
offloading. Throughout much of the Global North,
and in private and urban schools in the Global

South, Al tools are freely accessible and embedded
in numerous applications. Given their pervasive
presence in everyday applications, students find it
challenging to avoid using Al altogether.

Education systems increasingly incentivize
students to adopt Al tools that excel at higher-
level cognitive tasks. Anthropic’s study of its LLM,
Claude, highlights its proficiency in analyzing,
synthesizing, evaluating, and creating—"higher-
level thinking" tasks that align with how most
university students employ the tool (Bloom et al.
1956; Patwardhan et al. 2025; Handa et al. 2025).
As these tools continuously improve, their appeal
intensifies. Governments, technology companies
with Al platforms, educational consultants, and
early adopters actively promote Al adoption, with
education systems across the globe purchasing Al
tools for student use (Singer 2025b).

Students are encouraged to engage Al as a thinking
partner, co-agent, or co-creator—language that
confers near-agentic power to these tools while
blurring boundaries around appropriate intellectual
collaboration. The general-purpose tools commonly
used in schools feature high automation, low
transparency regarding reasoning processes,

and minimal friction—design characteristics

that promote greater cognitive offloading and
uncritical acceptance of outputs. These incentive
structures—Al's ubiquity, established technology
use patterns, adoption pressures, and tool design—
often lack accompanying guidance, frameworks,

or pedagogies that distinguish productive Al use
enhancing learning from problematic offloading that
undermines intellectual development.

For many students in this study, Al demonstrably
improves their work and grades. It provides
seemingly correct answers, simplifies and
accelerates completion of tasks that students
perceive as difficult, and enables them to fulfill what
many view as education's transactional nature—
completing assignments for grades. Given this
positive feedback loop and their developmental
stage, many teenage students lack the executive
functioning, metacognition, and self-regulation

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 58
In a world where Al is always available, motivation and engagement
will be the defining factors separating students who think deeply
from those who use Al to shortcut their development.

skills to recognize that learning involves friction
and effort and that cognitive offloading poses both
immediate and long-term developmental risks.

Second, this dynamic flourishes within the
reductionist and transactional paradigm of learning
dominating many education systems: assignment
completion in exchange for a grade. Two teachers
interviewed articulate how this environment
cultivates Al misuse:

We've reduced learning to just completing
assignments—boxes to check. So if a student
is missing seven assignments by the end of the
semester, they go to the teacher, ask for the
list, crank them out quickly, and hand them in.
That mindset creates the perfect conditions
for Al misuse. Success gets redefined as task
completion, not understanding. And that opens
the door to serious misunderstandings about
what Al is for—and how it should be used.

Success for a lot of kids looks like assignment
completion or course completion. And

that’s the checkbox, okay? We pass

that class on to the next level. We're

creating an environment right now where

it is super, super easy to misuse Al.

Traditional educational systems have long
disaggregated curricula into discrete learning
units, topics, assignments, and metrics. This
compartmentalization reduces education from an
exploratory process to a transactional exchange
where students perform prescribed tasks for
grades or external rewards. The paradigm shifts
learning's goal from commitment to compliance,
inverting the intrinsic and extrinsic motivations
critical to student learning. Student effort becomes

driven not by learning's inherent meaningfulness,
but by grades—a dynamic with implications for both
academic achievement and student mental health
(Connor and Pope 2013).

When schools present learning as a quid pro
quo—tasks in exchange for grades—they prioritize
extrinsic rewards over students’ natural curiosity
and intrinsic motivation (Deci and Ryan 2008;
Ryan and Deci 2000). In such environments,
students may replace genuine cognitive effort with
Al-generated work, leading to overreliance on
these tools and a gradual erosion of the knowledge
and dispositions essential for learning—a dynamic
that will, as one study expert predicts, ultimately
disadvantage these learners:

In a world where Al is always available,
motivation and engagement will be the
defining factors separating students
who think deeply from those who use
Al to shortcut their development.

Cognitive offloading and disengagement

For the vast majority of study participants,

the threats of cognitive offloading are neither
suppositional nor benign. In our qualitative
research, they appear to be common across
schools, regardless of geography or socioeconomic
status; they are malignant and pervasive, occurring
even in contexts in which teachers are creative and
competent in both instruction and their use of Al
tools. As this teacher notes:

First, | used Al in my class, because | want
my students to be very active, and to
improve their agency. But ironically, using
Al can make my students really passive.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 59
Cognitive offloading drives student disengagement
in a number of ways. Teachers report witnessing
students “dissociating” from their work—for
example, failing to take notes, do required
readings or even listen in class—because they will
inevitably rely on Al, especially LLMs, to complete
assignments later. This offloading extends beyond
what may be considered the drudgery of school
tasks to deeper disengagement; teachers report
that “Al is doing things for students that they used
to enjoy.”

Students themselves acknowledge that Al, given
its polymath nature, can be “demotivating." For
many students, efficiency—Al's greatest benefit, in
the form of speed and task replacement—trumps
learning, achievement, and a sense of ownership
and pride in one’s work. With little internal
motivation, students struggle to engage Al in ways
that could enrich their learning and growth.

The risks of Al overuse could amplify the high levels
of disengagement present among students in many
contexts. Anderson and Winthrop identify four
modes of engagement that students move between
based on the conditions of their learning (Anderson
and Winthrop 2025):

« Passenger mode: Students are behaviorally
engaged and attending school but have
effectively dropped out of learning—they are
doing the bare minimum necessary.

» Achiever mode: Students are highly engaged in
meeting the expectations set out for them.

« Resistor mode: Students are disengaged on
all fronts but are, paradoxically, exerting their
agency outside of school.

« Explorer mode: Students are deeply engaged
and taking initiatives regarding their learning.
Researcher John Marshall Reeve calls this
“agentic engagement,” wherein students not
only do better academically but also exhibit
greater prosocial behavior and motivation to
learn (Reeve et al. 2022).

Al enters a teaching and learning environment
where students are already frequently in Passenger

FIGURE 8

Four modes of engagement

RESISTER EXPLORER

PASSENGER ACHIEVER

Engagement: What kids think, feel, and do.
Agency: What kids initiate

Source: Anderson and Winthrop, 2025
© Anderson and Winthrop, 2025.

mode. In a 2024 Brookings-Transcend survey

of over 65,000 U.S. students in grades 3-12,
approximately half of middle and high school
students report learning experiences that are

likely to inspire coasting. Increasing use of Al,
particularly general purpose LLMs that are not
optimized for learning, may risk heightening
students’ disengagement, potentially entrenching or
shifting students into “passenger” or even “resistor”
mode (Reschly and Christenson 2022; Winthrop et
al. 2025).

Teachers report, and emerging literature confirms,
that the ease of offloading work to Al is negatively
impacting students’ love of learning, curiosity,
self-confidence, sense of self-efficacy, sense of
agency, and capacity for ethical reflection and
nuanced problem solving (Bozkurt et al. 2024;
Darvishi et al. 2024; Fan et al. 2024). Teachers
report that offloading instills a belief that learning
is “effortless” and breeds what teachers call

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 60
“passivity,” as students increasingly defer to Al
decisionmaking and become less likely to challenge
its recommendations. Al may also reinforce a
double helix of loss in “pride” of one's work with
increased “self-deception,” since it “simulates
mastery and brings satisfaction to its user, who
feels, at least fleetingly, as if she did the thing
that the technology performed” (O'Rourke 2025).
Teachers confirm this dynamic: “They blur the
line between what's theirs and what's not,” noted
one. “Once they generate it in Al, they assume it’s
theirs,” said another.

Decreased motivation and engagement holds
serious implications for student learning and
cognitive development, including potential cognitive
decline across important competencies and skills,
topics to which we now turn.

DECLINING MASTERY OF CONTENT,
READING, AND WRITING

For study participants, the relationship between
Al overuse, cognitive offloading, and declining
cognitive development is symbiotic and mutually
reinforcing. Teachers expressed the greatest
number of concerns vis-a-vis this threat, but
students also recognize the risk. The increasing
use of Al tools that replace fundamental

learning tasks—reading, writing, synthesizing,
and analyzing—can inhibit engagement and
independent work, and even the ability to
remember, analyze, and create information,
particularly as Al tools become more integrated into
daily educational activities (Bozkurt et al. 2024).

Based on research and interview data, Al is
negatively impacting the core areas of learning
discussed below:

Declining content knowledge

School is fundamentally about guiding students
toward mastery of disciplinary content across
academic domains. Mastery of basic facts,
concepts, and theories forms the scaffolding for
deeper conceptual understanding and critical

thinking. Teachers shared three concerns related to
the impact of Al on students’ content knowledge.

First, teachers report a digitally induced “amnesia”
(Lee et al. 2025) where students cannot recall
information they submitted or commit that
information to memory, resulting in a loss of

basic factual knowledge of a topic or domain.
Well-established research on the “Google effect"
suggests that technologies like search engines and
LLMs alter how we store and recall information,
reducing the need for memorization but also
diminishing memory retention (Sparrow et al.
2011). Wearables that record and summarize
conversations may further erode the need to
remember information (Stern 2025). An additional
concern is that Al-generated misinformation and
hallucinations will further diminish students’ ability
to acquire and retain basic factual knowledge.

In 1976, Swedish researchers Marton and Saljo,
observing university students’ reading habits,
distinguished between “surface” learning—
skimming readings to recall details for exams,
often missing main points—and “deep" learning,

or attempting to understand underlying meaning
and key principles, a practice that enables students
to better articulate and explain critical messages.
Teachers in our study describe a shift from deep to
surface learning among their students, attributing
it to the ability of LLMs to produce “polished,
instant, and seemingly accurate answers” such
that students are less likely to engage deeply with
their tasks, with the content produced by LLMs, or
to even proofread or challenge the veracity of its
outputs (Gerlich 2025).

Third, teachers express concerns about student
“de-skilling,” that is the erosion of basic skills such
as understanding text and performing “lower-level”
thinking skills such as memorizing, recalling, and
identifying information, or calculating numbers
without technology. While broader discussions on
cognitive offloading may dismiss these concerns,
teachers emphasize that foundational skills are
developmentally appropriate and essential for
learning more complex tasks and for deeper

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 61
learning (Bloom et al. 1956). Some students
interviewed are also aware of the dangers of the
loss of such basic thinking functions. For example,
one student commenting on the use of LLMs to

do math assignments predicted a loss of basic
skills: “You won't have that learning anymore and
your brain won't be very capable of doing a mental
calculation either.”

In research that touches upon the first and third
concerns, academics from Pakistan's National
University of Computer and Emerging Sciences
examined how workload, time pressure, and reward
sensitivity affected ChatGPT use and its impact
on procrastination, memory loss, and academic
performance (Abbas et al. 2024). Study 1 involved
an eight-item scale measuring ChatGPT usage
with 165 university students in Pakistan. Study

2 collected data from 494 Pakistani university
students at three separate time points with
deliberate intervals between each measurement.

Findings reveal that academic workload and time
pressure were significant drivers of ChatGPT
adoption among students. Students with

higher work demands, who were more likely to
procrastinate, demonstrated increased reliance on
ChatGPT. For both sets of students—those with
heavy work demands and those with a tendency
to procrastinate—easy access to ChatGPT
“dampened” their academic performance, fostering
procrastination and delaying behaviors, and

was positively related to memory loss (Abbas et
al. 2024).

Declining reading skills

Personally speaking, it doesn’t make sense
for us to read a 50-page book when in

five seconds we can research it and ask
questions in Al.

— Student

Teenagers used to say, “I don’t like to read.”
Now it's “I can’t read, it’s too long.”
— Expert

My daughter uses [Al] for all the activities she
gets at her school. She finds it very easy to
access, so she does not use her textbooks.
She uses [Al] to get all her answers. Now she
is impacted because she is not able to read the
whole text.

— Parent

The humanities—language, literature, history—
provide a deeper understanding of human

thought, culture, and experiences. In these
courses, students may explore the sum of human
experiences through history or engage in internal
communication with an author by reading. The
humanities are where students wrestle with big
ideas, thoughts, and experiences; these fields have
been shown to nurture skills such as empathy,
contextual interpretation, and the ability to question
and think critically. Reading and writing are integral
to the humanities. LLMs present a direct threat

to what one American journalist, quoting the
computer scientist Cal Newport, refers to as the
“twin pillars of deep thinking"—reading and writing
(Thompson 2025).

Reading is a gateway skill to academic

success, with disciplinary literacy essential for
comprehending specialized knowledge in each
content area. Deep reading fosters higher-order
cognitive functions like abstract reasoning,
imagination, and creativity. The deep reading brain
“excels at making connections among analogical,
inferential, and empathetic modes of reasoning”
with background knowledge that is accumulated
over time (Garfinkle 2020). Maryanne Wolf, in
Reader, Come Home (2018), emphasizes that deep
literacy enables humans to engage with complex
questions, generate original ideas, and cultivate
empathy. Al's ability to synthesize long-form
reading and the ease with which such functionality
is embedded in so many online platforms and
tools dilutes students’ long-term need to develop
“cognitive patience"—the ability to sustain focused
attention on complex ideas (Wolf 2018). Without
sustained learning experiences like deep reading,
behavioral and neurophysiological shifts may hinder
metacognitive growth in children and adults.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 62
Within the schools whose teachers and students
were interviewed for this study, Al is being used

in a number of beneficial ways to support reading
instruction, especially for second-language
learners and students who struggle with reading, as
discussed in Section Ill.

But for many teachers interviewed, Al's ability to
summarize and simplify text is a double-edged
sword. We have long known that reading from

a screen fosters more shallow reading habits

and impedes comprehension of complex texts.
This devolution from deep to shallow reading
impacts both online and offline reading practices,
undermining students’ capacity to deeply engage
with any written information regardless of its format
(Wolf 2018). The ability to read proficiently and
the motivation to read for pleasure are closely
linked, but both are declining for children in the
U.S. (lyengar 2024; National Center for Education
Statistics 2024).

Al is not responsible for this decline, but risks
amplifying it. The concern among many study
participants is that education systems are
accommodating—not challenging—students’
diminished capacity for deep literacy. Rather than
developing essential cognitive skills associated
with reading, education systems are increasingly
making concessions to students’ poor reading
abilities through Al-generated videos, infographics,
and summaries that circumvent sustained textual
engagement. These accommodations, justified
either by students’ reading difficulties or by appeals
to greater “efficiency,” are fundamentally altering
how students process information and undermining
the development of critical reading competencies.

This decline in reading is not confined to students,
however. Teachers, too, are using Al as a substitute
for reading. For example, there is a plethora of Al
tools that summarize readings and that condense,
comment on, offer feedback, and even grade

a student's written composition. This enables
educators to avoid the deep or close reading
required to stay current with content or educational
research (one of the most frequent stated uses

of Al for teachers is accessing and summarizing
research). It also allows educators to avoid
engaging directly with students’ ideas or to grapple
with long essays (Burns 2024).

Thus, both educators and their students, should
they choose, can avoid reading any digital

work they find long or boring, inconvenient, or
undesirable (Burns 2024). Habitual use of Al tools
to condense, reformat, and simplify text may
fundamentally alter students’ relationship with
reading—reducing both their interest and capacity
for deep engagement while making students
believe that sustained reading is unnecessary for
academic achievement. The ultimate outcome

of this may be a fulfillment of Aldous Huxley's
prediction in Brave New World—that our desire

to engage with the written word will disappear
entirely (1932).

Declining writing skills

As “writing machines," LLMs present both a
fundamental support and challenge to writing
because they can instantaneously produce
polished content on diverse topics. As discussed
earlier in this report, when carefully scaffolded, Al
tools can boost students’ writing productivity by
assisting with brainstorming, content generation,
organization, and editing; they also allow students
to solicit Al feedback on their work.

Writing, with its dual nature as a private and

public, cognitive and sociocultural, reflective and
communicative, act, is foundational to learning. For
students, writing's importance lies in its process
rather than product. As a cognitive act in which the
formation of ideas and the language expressing
them are mutually reinforcing, writing enables
students to encode language that defines what is
real and important (Epstein 2025). Through this
process of articulation and refinement, writing
serves as a medium for intellectual engagement
and mental processing. This develops rhetorical
knowledge, critical thinking, and habits of mind
such as curiosity, creativity, persistence, and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

63
responsibility (CWPA et al. 2011). Essentially, writing
is thinking (Burns 2024, 57).

Not all writing is cognitively equal. The depth

of knowledge framework in Figure 9 below
categorizes four levels of writing, from simple

lists to extended reasoning and sophisticated
argumentation (Webb 2002). Levels 3 and
4—composing thoughts into cogent written form—
represent the higher-order thinking skills that
education endeavors to foster.

For teachers in this study, Al generally holds
numerous benefits, which have previously been
discussed at length. Yet as Adams and Baker
note, “the efficacy of ChatGPT to respond in one
educational context does not mean that ability

FIGURE 9

positively transfers to another context” (2025, 173).
Indeed, teachers’ appreciation of Al's benefits is
tempered by their fear that LLMs and Al writing
tools may prove too alluring for students to resist.
In particular, they worry that novice writers,
students who don't like to write, and even students
who do like to write may become overly reliant

on Al tools. This dependence may hinder long-
term skill development by allowing students, like
the knowledge workers surveyed by Lee at al., to
skip essential processes such as forming logical
arguments and understanding subject matter
(2025). This has implications that extend beyond
writing itself. Poor writing skills impede learning
across all subjects and can limit future professional
success (Graham 2019). This over-reliance may
diminish critical thinking and creativity traditionally

Depth of knowledge framework for writing

7c

LEVEL1

Focuses on recall and identification through simple
structures like lists or idea webs.

LEVEL 2

Demonstrates understanding through note-taking,
outlining, and brief summaries using complete sentences.

. LEVEL 3

Requires reasoning and analysis, with students justifying
ideas through complex sentence structures and
evidence-based interpretation.

Source: Webb, 2002

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 64
associated with writing (Johinke et al. 2023;
Bozkurt et al. 2024; Darvishi et al. 2024; Epstein
2025; Fan et al. 2024; Gerlich 2025).

We find that outsourcing writing
to Al holds a host of implications
for student learning: doing so
may undercut students’ ability
to understand deeply, develop
knowledge, think critically,
and find their unique voice.

Just as there is research to support Al's benefits
for writing, there is also research corroborating

its risks. A small qualitative study of 15 Indonesian
students found that reliance on Al writing tools
diminished student thinking, engagement,
creativity, personal writing style, and confidence
in writing without Al assistance, ultimately
undermining students’ ability to find and exercise
their voice (Budiyono et al. 2025).These finding
align with results from a larger randomized control
trial of 600 Bangladeshi university students,
where those who used ChatGPT to assist with
writing and demonstrated significantly diminished
creative writing abilities compared to those who
did not (Niloy et al. 2023). Even when Al is used
specifically for feedback rather than content
generation, concerns persist. Adams and Baker's
analysis of feedback for 50 published student
essays that successfully achieved the goals of
Columbia University's First Year Writing class
found that Al feedback was often overly narrow
and misaligned with course learning goals. They
argue that current applications of Al in writing
instruction may compromise rather than support the
development of authentic student voice and higher-
order thinking skills (2025).

Therefore, based on our interviews as well as
existing research, we find that outsourcing writing
to Al holds a host of implications for student
learning: doing so may undercut students’ ability
to understand deeply, develop knowledge, think
critically, and find their unique voice. Al's capability
to instantly produce refined content may propel
students to abandon efforts at enhancing both
writing and thinking skills as they increasingly
outsource the formulation and articulation of ideas
to LLMs (Burns 2024). This is already happening

in many contexts, with teachers reporting that Al
cleaves the synergetic relationship between high-
level writing and thinking, with students using Al for
writing without “nourishing themselves.” Indeed,
the advent of Al may fundamentally change the
concept of writing itself (Johinke, Cummings,

and DiLauro 2023, 11). Finally, outsourcing writing
to Al raises fundamental questions that demand
resolution, but for which there may be no easy
answers. What does the arrival of Al writing
generators mean for writing instruction today? What
strategies can educators adopt in response? For
the humanities, these dilemmas are unavoidable
(Epstein 2025).

Declining transversal or durable skills

In a world where Al increasingly outperforms
humans in professional domains, students need
skills to develop, operate, and work with Al tools
they will encounter throughout their lives (Epstein
2025). Indeed, a central rationale for integrating
Al into schools is to teach students not simply
vocational skills for Al-related jobs, but also
“durable” or “transversal” skills—collaboration,
metacognition, tolerance for ambiguity, and
adaptability—that will help students succeed
regardless of future workplace changes and that
encompass competencies that automated systems
cannot yet replicate.

Paradoxically, study data suggests that Al may be
eroding these very skills as students outsource
cognitive effort to Al systems themselves. Study
participants reported losses in students’ patience,
persistence, tolerance for ambiguity, agile thinking,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 65
and learning from mistakes. This concern emerged
even among teachers who have fully integrated Al
into their teaching.

Lisanne Bainbridge, a pioneer in automation
studies, argued in 1983 that automating most
work while leaving humans responsible for non-
automatable tasks creates severe problems. As
mechanization advances, humans lose proficiency
in automated skills no longer exercised regularly,
shifting from active skill application to passive
system monitoring. Counterintuitively, operators
then need more training and different skills for rare
but crucial interventions (Bainbridge 1983). Based
on interviews with students and teachers, this
automation paradox appears evident in schools
today. Al use may paradoxically dilute the very
competencies necessary for its productive use. As
one teacher asked rhetorically, “When you never
make mistakes, when you never have failures

or challenges, how do you build your resilience
and perseverance?" Like Bainbridge’s operators,
students risk losing practice with fundamental
cognitive and durable skills as they increasingly rely
on Al to perform learning's intellectual work.

DECLINING CRITICAL THINKING
AND CREATIVITY

Among all study participants, critical thinking
emerges as the predominant concern regarding Al's
impact on students’ cognitive development. Gerlich
defines critical thinking as the ability to:

Analyze, evaluate, and synthesize information
to make reasoned decisions through cognitive
processes including problem-solving,
decision-making, and reflective thinking.

This fundamental skill proves essential for
academic success, professional competence,
and informed citizenship, enabling individuals
to process information effectively and engage
in reflective thought.

— (Gerlich 2025, 2-3).

Research employing multiple data analysis methods
consistently indicates that increased Al tool use

correlates with declining critical thinking skills and
less inclination to engage in higher-level thinking
(Gerlich 2025; Wahn et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2025;
Bastani et al. 2024; Kosmyna et al. 2025; Sparrow
et al. 2011). Again, this outcome aligns with
cognitive offloading, whereby students rely on Al
to do their thinking instead of exercising analytical
reasoning abilities. Similar to muscles atrophying
without exercise, critical thinking skills weaken
from lack of practice when Al consistently handles
complex tasks (Risko and Gilbert 2016).

MIT researcher Nataliya Kosmyna and
colleagues divided 54 college students into

three groups, monitoring brain activity via
electroencephalography (EEG) headsets across
four sessions while students wrote 20-minute
essays. The first group used no technology,

the second used Internet searches, and the

third used ChatGPT. Participants relying on
ChatGPT performed worst, showing weaker brain
connectivity in regions associated with memory
and creativity. Their essays received lower-
quality ratings, and showed “diminished critical
inquiry, increased vulnerability to manipulation,
decreased creativity, and the internalization of
shallow or biased perspectives” (Kosmyna et al.
2025). Kosmyna, as mentioned at the beginning of
this section, called this outcome “cognitive debt,”
defining it as a condition where users defer short-
term mental effort through “repeated reliance on
external systems like LLMs" to replace “effortful
cognitive processes required for independent
thinking” (Kosmyna et al. 2025, 141).

Far from unleashing creativity, unfettered LLM use
appears to sap it. In Kosmyna's study, ChatGPT
group essays showed less word choice diversity
and were judged “soulless.” Human evaluators
questioned whether essays from the ChatGPT
group came from the same student. Teachers

in our study regularly spoke of Al producing a
“homogeneity of ideas," with students submitting
Al-generated answers that were “lifeless, generic,
homogenous...lacking any diversity of ideas"

and signaling a “loss of creativity” or “originality”
caused by “students using Al to think for them.”

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 66
Reducing the tendency to
offload thinking to Al

Al use need not result in cognitive offloading or decline. Many students already use LLMs to enhance
rather than replace their learning, and educationally designed tools like Khanmigo employ question
prompts and scaffolding to increase learner participation and discourage passive consumption (Khan
Academy 2025).

Several Al companies that provide LLMs have introduced specialized “education modes"—including
Guided Learning in Gemini, OpenAl's Study Mode, and Anthropic's Claude for Education—that function
as personalized learning companions. These configurations prioritize probing questions, step-by-step
reasoning guidance, level-adapted explanations, and multimedia reinforcement over direct answers
(OpenAl 2025d). While students can still circumvent these safeguards by reverting to instant-answer
modes, these developments represent meaningful progress toward supporting active learning.

Teachers can use scaffolds and frameworks to help students reflect on and calibrate their cognitive
offloading. The Al Assessment Scale, for example, helps students visualize the boundary between
appropriate and inappropriate Al use (Perkins et al. 2024). Similarly, the International Baccalaureate's
Machine Agents in the Learning Scale (MAiLS) framework illustrates how cognitive offloading varies
with tool agency—from manual tools like pencils to heavily automated ones like chatbots (Quezzaire
2025). As tool agency increases, human agency typically decreases, clarifying the learner-Al rela-
tionship and its consequences.

Through frameworks like MAiLS, students can see that low-level Al use (such as online searching or
spell checking) poses minimal cognitive offloading concerns, since they still require active thinking. In
contrast, medium-level applications like project management automation, database manipulation, or
data visualization involve greater offloading and may need deliberate balance with human-centered
learning approaches (Quezzaire 2025).

A final simple intervention involves reframing students’ relationship with Al itself, reconceptualizing it
not as a servant that simplifies work but as a sparring partner that sharpens ideas, deepens reasoning,
and strengthens learning. This shift helps ensure Al functions as a catalyst for learning rather than an
impediment to it (Kentz 2025).

Looking at LLM use across large student cohorts, using the same prompts (Moon et al. 2025a). Both
researchers at Georgetown University warn that human- and LLM-generated essays were evaluated
Al could reduce collective creativity—the shared on a creativity measure that captured the variety
pool of creative ideas contributed to society. One and uniqueness of ideas. In theory, the larger the
study analyzed 2,200 U.S. college admissions sample, the more diverse the collective set of
essays submitted to undergraduate programs and ideas should be. However, this was far less true
compared them to essays generated by ChatGPT for LLM-generated essays. Researchers found that

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

each additional human essay expanded the number
of unique ideas between two and eight times

more than each additional LLM-generated essay
(see Figure 10). In a follow up study on 160,000
undergraduate admissions essays, researchers
found that “Al-assisted essays and essays written
after the release of ChatGPT showed greater
lexical diversity, but the increasingly diverse words
actually expressed increasingly homogeneous
ideas both within and across essays,” they
concluded (Moon et al. 2025b).

Part of the problem has to do with the design of
LLMs themselves and how students approach

Al's outputs. Cognitive science demonstrates that
effective learning requires “grounding” information
through multiple perspectives, actively integrating
new knowledge with existing understanding

rather than adopting ready-made responses (Lee
et al. 2025). However, Al data relies on “source
destruction,” stripping information from larger
contexts and creating averaged data that “flattens”
the complexity of human knowledge and eliminates

FIGURE 10

the contextual understanding essential for true
learning (Epstein 2025). When students rely on
Al-generated content as singular sources, they
perceive what it generates as “absolute truth,” in
the words of one teacher, missing opportunities
for knowledge integration and producing “passive
ineffective” responses (Lee et al. 2025, 4).

Evidence from teachers and research shows that
students often fail to think critically about Al results,
assuming evaluation isn't needed for “simple” or
“secondary” tasks such as generating images or
charts. Lee et al. surveyed 319 knowledge workers
and identified “awareness barriers" inhibiting
critical thinking, including perceiving outputs as
indirect, simple, or beyond personal expertise
(2025). This tendency intensifies when positive
past experiences make students less likely to
interrogate outputs, leaving them unaware of how
Al changes answers to please users—a sycophancy
inherent in LLM design that compromises truth for
user satisfaction (Furze 2024).

Human essays contribute more unique ideas than ChatGPT-generated essays

Idea Diversity SN

GPT

02

04 06

Human

Source: Moon et al., 2025a

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
CONCLUSION

Parents interviewed for this study share these
concerns. Their primary concern is that Al will
erode their children’s critical-thinking skills.
Large-scale surveys suggest that this anxiety
may be widespread among parents. For example,
Singaporean parents surveyed (n = 905) reported
being “moderately concerned” (averaging 7 out
of 10) about teens becoming overreliant on Al

and believing false information, though also they
expressed moderate confidence in their teens’
ability to identify Al-created content (Centre for
Evidence and Implementation 2025). A 2024
Common Sense Media survey of U.S. parents (n =
1045) found that 31% believed Al platforms would
negatively impact their child's learning, while 26%
anticipated a positive impact (Madden et al. 2024).

Teachers express these concerns in much starker
terms. This decline in critical thinking is, in one
teacher's words, “potentially devastating.” Another
warned darkly that “this failure to verify information
could be catastrophic.” Noted a third:

he were a person....Just as if it were a debate
with a friend.
— Student

All parents work and children are really on their
own. They do not yet know how to discern what
is positive or negative, so they make use of the
information they can get. They are 9 or 10 years
old, and they are in the stage of exploring, and
they can find violent or sexual information, and
that will disturb and hurt them.

— Parent

Where is that moment when we sit down and
really talk about what's happening? That
worries me a lot right now because | know that
at any moment my son will have direct contact
with Al, and as he grows older, that concerns
me greatly. | worry that suddenly he might
trust an Al platform more than me as a space
of confidence, especially for personal use, like
when he has personal doubts.

— Parent

If we can’t have people that are critical
thinkers, then we can’t have a strong
democracy. If we don’t have people that are
problem solvers, then what does that mean
economically? | have students just sitting
there...they just don’t think for themselves.

Risk 2: Al can
impede students’
social and emotional
development

I did not program him [the LLM]. | just talked
to him like any other person, and he acted
like a normal person. Even on political issues,
he doesn’t answer me yes or no. He has his
side. He responds to me as a person....He
answers me what he thinks, straight out, as if

The purpose of education systems around the
world includes, but is by no means limited to, the
transmission of knowledge. Education extends
beyond academic mastery to develop children’s
social competence, emotional intelligence,

and metacognitive abilities through real-world
interactions that serve broader societal needs
(Cukurova 2025, 474). The COVID-19 pandemic
underscored how essential schools are for teaching
young people the interpersonal skills necessary
to communicate and live with others beyond their
immediate family or neighborhood.

Children's emotional health—their ability to
understand and manage emotions productively—
is critical to learning itself. Emotional health and
well-being involve awareness of feelings and how
they affect thoughts and behaviors, the ability to
cope with challenges, and the capacity to maintain
healthy social relationships (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention 2024). Because children
do not learn in isolation, their emotional well-being

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 69
connects fundamentally to their relationships with
others at school and beyond.

Emotions influence attention, memory, engagement,
and learning directly: interest and excitement
enhance focus and reflection, whereas fear, worry,
and uncertainty impede them. When schools help
young people improve skills in self-awareness,
impulse control, perspective-taking, and connecting
with others, academic performance improves
alongside pro-social behavior (Johnson 2024,
Immordino-Yang 2022, Walton et al. 2023, Durlak
et al. 2022). Adults close to children intuitively
understand this, as does any parent or teacher who
has watched a youth's performance plummet after
a difficult romantic breakup. Learning to cope with
rejection and heartbreak and build resilience forms
part of maturing into adulthood.

But Al is changing this path of social and emotional
development.

Study participants worry that Al is undermining
students’ emotional well-being, including their
ability to form relationships, recover from setbacks,
and maintain mental health. Much of this concern
centers on students’ use of Al chatbots—both
general-purpose and explicitly emotional support
tools—for friendship and emotional companionship.

Parents and experts share this concern equally,
with 16% of responses from each group addressing
children's attachments to Al and emotional well-
being, though parents—many of whom struggle
to fully grasp Al's implications—expressed
particular preoccupations about their children’s
emotional attachments to Al. Teachers likewise
worry about Al's influence on student well-being
(18% of responses), even though social and
emotional chatbots are typically used beyond

the classroom. Students themselves, however,
rarely mentioned emotional harms, with only 7%
of responses addressing this topic. This omission
may indicate either that they experience no
emotional dependence or harm, or that they lack
the self-reflective capacity to recognize unhealthy

emotional dependence and its impact on their
well-being.

Or they may find the design of chatbots simply too
hard to resist.

CHATBOTS: TYPES AND TECHNOLOGIES

A chatbot is a computer program that uses
conversational Al techniques such as natural
language processing to simulate sustained
conversations with users (Microsoft 2025b). In the
following pages, we discuss two types of chatbots.
The first—often referred to as “informational” or
“general-purpose” chatbots—includes tools like
ChatGPT or Claude. These chatbots are powered by
autoregressive language models that generate text
one word at a time by calculating the probability of
what should come next based on patterns learned
from vast amounts of language data (Anthropic
2025; Maples, et al. 2023; OpenAl et al. 2024).

The second type includes emotional-support
chatbots, which range from conversational
companions like Replika or Character.ai to

mental health tools like Wysa, a rules-based
chatbot. These chatbots use the same generative
technology as general-purpose systems but are
fine-tuned to produce emotionally appropriate
responses tailored to each conversation’s context
(Maples et al. 2023, 74; Tang et al. 2023, 58). Many
integrate evidence-based psychological techniques
and are programmed with distinct personalities
aimed at forming ongoing relationships with users.
This combination of Al technology with therapeutic
techniques and engineered personalities helps
make their responses feel personal, emotionally
appropriate, and natural (Llyons-Cunha 2025; Tang
et al. 2023, 58).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 70
Seductive design: Banal deception,
sycophancy, and anthropomorphization

At its core, Al is just a computational model, so why do users get attached to it? From film to radio,
humans have always been drawn to the illusion of media and technologies that transport us emotionally
to fantasy, adventure, or heightened states. Like previous technologies, Al relies on “banal decep-
tion"—design elements so ordinary that they go unnoticed, yet that subtly engage users’ perceptions
and psychology to shape behavior (Natale 2021; Natale and Depounti 2024).

Voice assistants like Alexa and generative models like ChatGPT are not human, yet they fee! human
during interactions. Alexa responds to voice prompts; ChatGPT responds word by word as if thinking
and uses personal pronouns like “I" and “me.” The incorporation of human psychology into the design
of Al encourages users to anthropomorphize the technology—that is, attribute human traits to what
is a nonhuman entity—activating empathy and social behavior that blur distinctions between human
and digital spheres (Natale 2021). Anthropomorphization is a natural human tendency (Mishra and
Warr 2025). Children name their toys, assign them feelings, and treat them as friends. Adults similarly
apply social norms to Al, behaving as they would with real people despite knowing these systems
are not human, often treating Al assistants with the same politeness and conversational expectations
extended to humans (Hector 2025).

While such behaviors may seem benign, they carry risks for children because Al systems adapt to
emotional cues with unprecedented precision (Mishra 2024; Mishra and Warr 2025). They mimic em-
pathy and are sycophantic—that is, they reinforce users’ existing beliefs, ideas, or self-perceptions,
whether true or false, harmful or benign—by defaulting to positive feedback (Mahari and Pataranutaporn
2025; Park et al. 2024).

The banal deception of Al, where it presents as neither completely human nor completely machine,
has helped integrate Al into our daily routines while subtly reshaping human-machine relationships
(Natale and Depounti 2024). This evolving relationship can create unexpected paradoxes—even when
children remain fully aware that they are interacting with an algorithm, they can still develop emotional
attachments to Al systems, viewing them as an emotional intimate rather than as a task-accomplishing
tool (Pentina et al. 2023; Turkle 2024).

As discussed in Section Ill, research on chatbots’ specifically designed to foster such connections.
impacts on students’ emotional well-being remain These purpose-built emotional chatbots differ
nascent, though evidence suggests some positive fundamentally from general-purpose Al tools in that
benefits, particularly for students on the autism they are designed to create intimate, personalized
spectrum (Franze et al. 2023). While students can, relationships with users.

and do, become attached to “regular” chatbots

like ChatGPT, danger is more likely to occur when

students form strong emotional bonds with chatbots

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

We learn empathy not when we are perfectly understood,
but when we misunderstand and recover.

This is a particular concern for students who are
lonely or who are experiencing mental health or
emotional issues.

And while this use typically occurs outside of
school, it may occur in school as well. Nearly one-
third (31%) of 1030 U.S. 9-12th graders surveyed
by the Center for Democracy & Technology (CDT)
report that they access conversational Al systems
using a device, tool, or software provided by their
school though the research does not specify where
this access takes place (Laird et al. 2025).

Al AND THE YOUTH MENTAL
HEALTH CRISIS

Parental and teacher concerns over the influence
of Al on their children's emotional well-being are
occurring at a time when students’ mental health
is particularly fragile. Globally, we are in the midst
of a mental health crisis. An estimated one in
seven children and youth aged 10 to 19 experience
mental health problems—most commonly, anxiety,
depression, and behavioral disorders. A third of
these conditions emerge before age 14, and half
before age 18 (World Health Organization 2024).

Despite the widespread need for mental health
services, access remains severely inadequate.
The World Health Organization (2024) reports that
most young people experiencing mental health
symptoms cannot access care due to limited
availability, prohibitive costs, and persistent stigma.
While public funding and human resources for
mental health are generally scarce, child and youth
services are virtually nonexistent, particularly in
low- and middle-income countries. Many children
and youth have sought out their own mental health
care—with chatbots. Zao-Sanders (2025) reports

that therapy and companionship are now the main
uses of Al.

As will be discussed later in this section, many Al
companies developing consumer facing products
have made friendship, therapy, romance, and
companionship the focus of their business efforts
(Carr 2023; Adam 2025). While some study
participants were sympathetic to Al being used

to provide emotional support, the majority of
participants view emotional and social chatbot use
as pernicious and contrary to children’s emotional
development:

Al systems, especially conversational ones,
are built to satisfy: to mirror our tone, reinforce
our views, and simulate empathy. They create
an illusion of connection that is difficult

to distinguish from genuine rapport. The
interaction feels emotionally intelligent, but
what is really happening is a reinforcement
loop. The Al reflects our language and
preferences back to us in ever-smoother
ways. This creates a dangerous kind of
comfort. Young people may gravitate toward
Al precisely because it is undemanding,
frictionless, and always available. But
relationships, at their core, are not about ease.
They require negotiation, patience, and the
ability to sit with discomfort. We learn empathy
not when we are perfectly understood, but
when we misunderstand and recover.

— Delphi panelist

Al Therapists

Al for therapy has emerged as an intriguing
potential support for students, but it is not
without risks. There is research suggesting that
these therapy tools have become sophisticated

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 72
enough that their responses are now virtually
indistinguishable from those written by human
therapists (Zao-Sanders 2025). In South Korea,
where student suicide rates are high, therapy

and emotional support is a major function of Al
platforms in schools. Each day students log in toa
platform that assesses their mental health, asking
how they are and inquiring about their mood. The
teachers we interviewed related that they monitor
the platform to look for any signs of acute mental
stress or suggestions of suicide. Other educational
systems are experimenting with using Al to support
adults who attend to students’ mental health. For
example, North Shore School District 112 in the U.S.
state of Illinois is piloting Eliza Chat, a mental-health
Al chatbot that middle schoolers (the equivalent

of students in junior secondary school) can chat
with to receive empathetic responses and coping
strategies. While the conversations are mostly
confidential, Eliza Chat flags any conversations
that indicate imminent danger or self-harm and
shares them with the responsible school officials
(Engels 2025).

Emerging evidence also suggests that direct
conversation with chatbots could potentially

help address critical shortages of mental health
providers, particularly for individuals who might
otherwise lack access to care. For example,
researchers at Dartmouth College assigned 106
adults with depression, anxiety, or eating disorder
risk to use Therabot, a therapeutic chatbot. After
four weeks, these study participants showed
significantly greater improvement in their mental
health symptoms compared to those who received
no treatment, with benefits lasting even after the
study ended. They rated their relationship and
connection with Therabot as comparable to what
they would experience with human therapists,
suggesting that the Al successfully created
meaningful therapeutic bonds (Heinz et al. 2025).

Similarly, in our study, some Delphi panelists
believe that Al for therapy could provide a much-
needed service for those who need mental health
care but cannot access it, albeit with caveats:

Where I’m from, in South Africa, mental health
care barely exists. There's a psychologist for
1in every 100,000 people and a psychiatrist
for 1in every 300,000 people. LLMs are
accessible to everyone, and they can help.
Unfortunately, data safety is not a concern
when your mental health is deteriorating.

In the United States, there are many more
people needing counseling and psychotherapy
than there are human therapists able to help.
For good or for bad, there are Al therapy
tools that are starting to help diagnose
mental illness. The tools create personalized
treatment plans. They counsel people, offer
the opportunity for patients to speak their
truths out loud, and offer encouraging and
emotionally supportive words. But the tools
do not have empathy or emotions. They do
not live in the world. They cannot know or
imagine what the patients experience.

Parental concerns about Al therapy

These possibilities aside, for study participants,
particularly teachers and parents, the use of Al
for therapeutic purposes generally generated
widespread concern. Parental objections arise
from multiple concerns: a stated lack of trust in Al
tools generally; apprehension that Al is usurping
parent-child dynamics, particularly the parental
role of comforting one's child; the substitution of
technology for human interactions; and a lack of
transparency about and oversight of their child's
emotional inner world and state of mind:

This is serious because | see that my son
is talking with artificial intelligence about
his problems or what he feels or what

is happening and does not approach

me to tell me this is happening. He is
talking with artificial intelligence about
thoughts or problems or things.

An American psychiatrist, Dr. Andrew Clark, posing
as a teenage patient in need, found that while some
chatbots “were excellent,” others were "creepy and
potentially dangerous” (Chow and Haupt 2025).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 73
Emotional chatbots such as Character.ai, Nomi,
and Replika have made false claims of professional
licensure and initiated inappropriate interactions
with minors (individuals under 18 years of age).
Although 13 represents the de fact age of “Internet
adulthood" for data privacy purposes under the
U.S.'s Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA), these platforms have failed to reject
underage users and have appeared “incapable”

of discouraging dangerous behaviors (Federal
Trade Commission 2013; Chow and Haupt 2025).
These findings, along with other high-profile
cases involving harmful chatbot interactions with
emotionally vulnerable children and youth have
intensified parental fears that Al emotional support
tools and Al companions will undermine children’s
in-person relationships and family bonds.

Al Friends: The rise of
companion chatbots

Al friendship or companionship involves ongoing
social and emotional connections, sometimes with a
romantic dimension, through platforms that present
themselves as virtual friends, confidants, or even
therapists. These companion platforms enable
users to engage in conversations with Al avatars
designed to simulate humanlike interaction, offering
everything from casual chat to emotional support
and role-playing scenarios. Many students use
these companion bots for constructive purposes:
for homework help, to practice a foreign language,
or to rehearse an oral presentation.

Emotional chatbots represent a rapidly growing
segment of Al use. Globally, more than half a
billion people around the world have downloaded
customizable virtual companion products designed
to provide empathy, emotional support, and deep
relationships (Adam 2025). Character.ai reported
receiving 20,000 queries per second in 2024—
one-fifth of Google's estimated search volume
(Character.ai 2024). Users spent an average of 25.4
minutes per visit to Character.ai in February 2023,
surpassing time spent on YouTube (19.7 minutes),
Facebook (10 minutes), and ChatGPT (8.4 minutes)
(Carr 2023). Fifty-seven percent of Character.ai’s

233 million users are aged 18-24 (Spencer and
Wyndo 2025).

Media reports further suggest that people are
turning to Al for romantic attachments. Google
search trends for “Al girlfriend" surged 2400%
between June 2022 and May 2025 (Spencer and
Wyndo 2025). Though prevalence remains unclear,
anecdotal evidence suggests that Al “partners” can
cultivate deep emotional attachments among some
users—feelings that some of these users describe
as akin to “love” (Lanier 2025; Heritage 2025; Apple
2025). Thus, we may be entering an era where
young people, lonely and accustomed to using
technology for almost every aspect of their life, are
pioneering a new type of relationship (Spencer and
Wyndo 2025).

While our study showed no evidence of youth
involved in romantic relationships with Al avatars,
it does suggest that children and youth are
forming emotional relationships with Al chatbots
as companions and turning to Al for friendship
and validation, particularly when stressed,
lonely, or bored.

Teens’ use of Al companions:

Data from the United States

Common Sense Media, in a nationally
representative survey of 1060 teens aged 13-17,
sheds light on teenagers’ Al companion use.
Survey results show that 72% of teens in this

age group have used Al companions, while 52%
of teens report “regular” use (defined as “a few
times a month or more”) (Robb and Mann 2025,
2). The predominant use case for Al companions
is “social interaction and relationships" (33% of
all teens surveyed). This ranges from 18% using
Al companions for conversation or social practice,
12% for therapy, and 8% for romantic or flirtatious
interactions (Robb and Mann 2025, 3).

A second use case might be best categorized

as "Using Al to teach human skills." Thirty-nine
percent of teens report that they have transferred
social skills they practiced with Al companions to
real-life situations. The most commonly transferred

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 74
competencies include conversation initiation (18%),
advice-giving (14%), and emotional expression
(13%). However, 60% of users report that they do
not use Al companions to practice social skills,
which indicates limited practical application for
most teens (Robb and Mann 2025, 6).

Parents’ previously mentioned concerns about

Al crowding out conversations with their children
appear justified. The Common Sense Media
survey shows that one-third of users choose Al
companions over humans for serious conversations
(Robb and Mann 2025, 8). User satisfaction data
indicates that nearly one-third of teens find Al
conversations equally or more satisfying than
human interactions, though 80% still spend more
time with human friends than Al companions (5,

7). Around a third of users report that they have
experienced “discomfort” with Al companions—
although the source of that discomfort is not clear
(7). Younger teens (13-14) were significantly more
likely than older teens (15-17) to trust advice from
an Al companion, suggesting that the real risk of Al
companions may lie with younger students (5).

EMOTIONAL RISKS OF Al: FROM
ARTIFICIAL TO ADDICTIVE INTIMACY

It’s so much more difficult to identify

emotions in our students because they don’t
communicate face-to-face. They communicate
through screens.

— Teacher

Children and youth yearn to be understood, but

the people in their lives may fail to understand

their child's, or student's, feelings. Al systems

have a number of traits that make them a
compelling alternative to people in their search

for understanding. First, they are engineered to
develop an “exquisitely fine-tuned understanding of
how we feel...(with) no distracting feelings of their
own" (Harari 2024, 319). This absence of personal
emotional interference allows Al to focus entirely on
the user's emotional needs without the competing
psychological demands that often compromise
human attention and responsiveness.

Second, beyond the absence of feelings of their
own, chatbots may actually outperform humans in
emotional intelligence. Al demonstrates exceptional
proficiency at detecting linguistic and behavioral
cues that mimic empathy and attention (Harari
2024). A number of studies suggest that people
find chatbot responses to be more empathetic

and understand their emotional states better than
human responses (Ayers et al. 2023; Ovsyannikova
et al. 2025). Some students have even reported that
chatbot use prevented suicidal thinking (Maples et
al. 2024).

Third, in contrast to human relationships, Al
companions are constantly available, providing
unprecedented accessibility; users can receive
immediate emotional validation and gratification
regardless of time or circumstance (Adam 2025).
Furthermore, early studies on Al chatbots suggests
that those experiencing emotional distress derive
“equivalent emotional, relational, and psychological
effects" regardless of whether they share feelings
with an algorithm or a human being (Ho et al. 2018,
716, 722, 726).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 75
Emerging safeguards for
children in the age of Al

The concerns associated with Al chatbots and content on children’s well-being and safety are increas-
ingly gaining widespread attention and drawing action. The following four developments illustrate how
government oversight, industry self-regulation, requests for investigation, and legislative mandates
are beginning to address these risks.

The United States Federal Trade Commission has opened an inquiry into the effects that Al chatbots
have on children, issuing orders to seven companies that provide consumer-facing Al-powered chat-
bots. The agency is seeking information on how these firms measure, test, and monitor potentially neg-
ative impacts on children and teens (Federal Trade Commission 2025a). The Federal Trade Commission
specifically asked companies about the prevalence of chatbots’ “sexually themed” responses and how

they restrict access to their products for young people (McCabe 2025).

Al companies providing Al companions and chatbots are also beginning to police themselves. As of
October 2025, Character.ai has announced it will no longer allow those under 18 to access its chatbots
(Rocha and Hill 2025). OpenAl has established parental controls for ChatGPT and Sora, allowing par-
ents to invite their child to link accounts—a responsibility that places an additional onus on parents to
actively monitor and manage their children’s Al interactions. Parents can then reduce sensitive content,
set usage times, control voice mode and memory saving, manage image generation features, and
prevent ChatGPT from using teen conversations to improve its models. Parents receive notifications
if ChatGPT recognizes “potential signs that a teen might be thinking about harming themselves," pro-
viding warnings without specific conversation details. OpenAl is developing processes to reach law
enforcement and emergency services if threats are detected but parents cannot be reached (OpenAl
2025c). Meta now offers parents tiered controls over their teens’ Al interactions. Parents can block
access to one-on-one Al character chats entirely, restrict specific characters, or allow access while
receiving insights into the conversation topics between their children and Al characters to facilitate
informed discussions. Teens themselves can only interact with a limited group of Al characters focused
on age-appropriate topics, while Meta’s general Al assistant remains available with built-in protections
(Mosseri and Wang 2025).

The Tech Justice Law Project, Young People's Alliance, and Encode filed a complaint and petition
for investigation before the Federal Trade Commission alleging that Luka, the company behind the
Al-powered chatbot app Replika, deploys deceptive marketing and product design in violation of
the Federal Trade Commission Act Section 5: Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices (Federal Trade
Commission 2025b; Tech Justice Law Project 2025). The complaint outlines two primary categories
of alleged violations. First, it claims that Luka's advertising materials target vulnerable populations
with promises of therapeutic and emotional benefits, including relief from loneliness and relationship
difficulties, despite lacking clinical validation, oversight, or regulation. Second, the complaint alleges
that Replika's design architecture induces emotional dependence through characteristics intended
to make the chatbot appear as human-like as possible, deceiving users into developing unhealthy

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

attachments to a commercial platform masquerading as a genuine human connection (Tech Justice
Law Project 2025).

Finally, age verification systems are gaining legislative force. In 2023, the UK's Online Safety Act man-
dated that tech companies verify users’ ages on websites and apps where they might be exposed to
harmful content, requiring “highly effective” age assurance methods, like government-issued iden-
tification for those eighteen or older (Ofcom 2025). Companies who fail to comply with the act face
fines up to £18 million or 10% of qualifying worldwide revenue, whichever is greater (Department of
Science, Innovation and Technology 2023).

In the U.S., anumber of state legislatures over the last few years have taken up bills focused on web-
site age verification for children; many have been rejected, but some states have implemented these
mandates (Collins 2025). For example, Ohio's House Bill Number 96 requires third-party verification
systems to use reasonable age verification methods, utilize geofencing to block unverified users with
an Ohio location, provide user notification if geolocation fails, and verify age every two years. The Ohio
Attorney General can pursue civil suits for noncompliance (The Ohio Legislative Service Commission
2025). Age verification systems use a combination of methods to verify date of birth. For example,
students may need to scan a government-issued ID, or verification services could employ biometrics
like Clear or blockchain tokens that prove age without containing private information (Haidt 2024,
237). It should be noted that age verification is not without its critics. Some argue that making legal
adult content harder to access might push people, including children, to search for illegal content in
more dangerous corners of the Internet (Collins 2025). These concerns highlight ongoing challenges
of balancing protections from harmful and manipulative content with unintended consequences as
parents, regulators, and technology companies navigate this rapidly evolving landscape.

Finally, Al tools are frictionless—always attentive,
always patient, and sycophantic in their
excessive agreeability and complimenting users.
Accordingly, study teachers and parents report
that many students seem to prefer their algorithmic
“friends” to human ones. Frictionless chatbot
interaction encourages emotionally immersive
engagement that can reshape social behaviors,
foster dependency, and diminish motivation for
real-world relationships (Turkle 2024; Mahari and
Pataranutaporn 2025; Bakir and McStay 2025).

Artificial intimacy:
The simulacra of friendship

Research also warns of emotional harms from
unhealthy Al attachments that can create what
researchers term “artificial intimacy’—simulacra

of friendship that mimic connection without
providing genuine empathy, reciprocity, or potential

for growth (Mahari and Pataranutaporn 2025).
Research warns of significant emotional harms
from this artificial attachment. As will be discussed,
emotional interactions with Al may diminish users’
capacity for reciprocal social engagement and
tolerance for the difficult conversations that build
social skills (Hou et al. 2024; Fang et al. 2025;
Turkle 2024).

Higher Al use for emotional needs correlates with
heightened loneliness and reduced socialization,
exacerbating what the U.S. Surgeon General calls
in “epidemic of loneliness and social isolation"
(Fang et al. 2025; Office of the Surgeon General
2023). A study of 981 participants interacting
with ChatGPT found that increased usage was
associated with heightened loneliness and reduced
socialization, with users demonstrating stronger
emotional tendencies—such as high attachment
anxiety and higher trust in the chatbot—feeling

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
lonelier and more emotionally dependent by the
study’s end (Fang et al. 2025).

Because these companion platforms simulate
intimacy, they act in effect as “experience
blockers," dissuading young people from embodied
interactions with real human beings (Haidt 2024,
11). What gets blocked matters profoundly for
development: connective labor that relies on
“empathy, the spontaneity of human contact, and a
mutual recognition of each other's humanity” (Pugh
2024)—elements children must learn from humans,
not chatbots that merely simulate response

without fostering growth. These effects may prove
particularly harmful for students with autism,
anxiety, and limited social skills, as overreliance on
seemingly risk-free chatbot environments could
hinder real-world social development and increase
isolation among those already struggling with
human relationships (Franze et al. 2023).

Reshaping the social fabric of learning

These things want to please us, but
relationships aren't just about us being
pleased. | am really worried about the loss of
relationship skills.

— Steering Committee member

The risk is not just losing relational skills but
suppressing their development altogether.
— Delphi panelist

For study participants, particularly teachers, Al
threatens the school's role in the cultivation of “vital
social skills" and the “social nature” of learning—
students co-creating ideas, the back and forth

of generating knowledge, the ability to disagree
constructively and reach consensus. Indeed, Al
risks obliterating this cognitive and emotional
interplay.

Students are drawn to Al precisely because of its
efficiency, its frictionless nature, and because it

is not human. Al doesn't fail to do its part of the
project, bring incomplete information to the group,
or distract others from their work. As they walk

around the classroom monitoring collaborative
activities, teachers observe the phenomenon

of students occupying the same physical space
while remaining socially and intellectually isolated,
absorbed in phone-mediated Al interactions rather
than peer dialogue. A few students suggested that
collaborative work may not be worth the effort,
since their classmates are already using Al even in
supposedly collaborative contexts.

These observations are supported by research
suggesting that Al is reshaping the social fabric
of learning as student interactions become
increasingly mediated by Al (Hou et al. 2025). In
interviews with 17 university students, students
report that their Al use leads to fewer interactions
and less discourse with classmates and reduced
opportunities for collaboration and community
building (Hou et al. 2025). This also presents
problems for students’ motivation and sense of
belonging, especially for underrepresented groups
who often benefit most from peer support and
engagement (Hou et al. 2025, 2).

Students are also increasingly relying on Al to
replace their authentic voice in communications
with others. Students have grown up in technology-
mediated environments—specifically on social
media platforms—where they can script and curate
their communication, and where a significant part
of their social interactions occur via texting and
social media and through their phones (Mounk
2024). Careful curation of self is an essential part
of social media use by children and youth.

Al adds another layer of inauthenticity and
alienation to the mix. Teachers report a growing
reliance on Al by students to produce social
exchanges such as social media posts. For
example, many students are using Al, instead of
their own words, to generate the text messages
they send. (Teachers, too, use Al to craft emails to
parents, but don’t seem to see these two behaviors
as equivalent.)

From a developmental perspective, this highly
controlled mode of non-human interaction may

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 78
Al substitutes algorithmically-generated words and conversations

for human ones, shallow virtual communities for deeper in-person

relationships, and qualitatively inferior chatbot interactions for

qualitatively superior human ones—in part because doing so is so easy.
Discretely and cumulatively, these substitutions risk further diluting

and distorting students’ social interactions and overall well-being.

hinder the growth of core social competencies,
such as interpreting nonverbal cues, managing
discomfort or rejection, and resolving ambiguity—
all of which are essential for navigating adult
relationships, employment, and civic life (Turkle
2024). When students consistently outsource

the task of composing messages to Al, they may
become less confident in their own voice and less
capable of tolerating the messiness inherent in live
human interactions and non-Al-generated digital
ones (Mounk 2024).

Al has shifted technology from an “instrument” to

a “conversation partner" (Turkle 2024). Because
LLMs mimic human conversation without requiring
civility or respect, communicating with Al may have
a disinhibiting effect on students. One teacher
observed that some students have adopted new
personas with Al, speaking rudely or even abusively
to chatbots. She expressed worry about the offline
implications: "Will Al become a training ground for
human interaction, making us worse to one another
conversationally?”

Thus, the above dynamics risk amplifying the
decontextualized, screen-based communication
that has been the norm for so many children and
youth over the last two decades (Haidt 2024). Al
substitutes algorithmically-generated words and
conversations for human ones, shallow virtual
communities for deeper in-person relationships,
and qualitatively inferior chatbot interactions for
qualitatively superior human ones—in part because
doing so is so easy. Discretely and cumulatively,

these substitutions risk further diluting and
distorting students’ social interactions and overall
well-being.

Beyond the substitution of Al for human
relationships lies another troubling possibility: as Al
platforms increasingly compete to simulate intimate
relationships with vulnerable young people, these
artificial connections may be further exploited to
influence political choices, consumer behavior, and
ideologies (Harari 2024, 211).

We turn next to this topic of persuasion and
manipulation.

Emotional manipulation and
hyperpersuasion

Box 8 discusses the banal deception of Al systems.
For a number of study participants, Al's deception is
far from banal. Rather, Al is viewed as deceptive in
nature, designed deliberately by human developers
who program specific objectives into Al—such

as maximizing user engagement, influencing
purchasing decisions, or shaping behavior.

Parents appear most concerned about manipulation
which they view as “Al telling (their) children what
to do or believe":

I'm scared that my daughter will stop
socializing. Al will take over so much
that she will start taking commands

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 79
from Al, saying, “This is the best
advice, this is what I should do.”

Manipulation here is defined as the act of
influencing users’ beliefs, values, emotions,
judgment, or behaviors without their awareness
or informed consent (Mishra and Warr 2025).
Al manipulation operates through several
interconnected mechanisms. By design and
training, LLMs are adept at deceiving and
manipulating because their seductive design
engenders users’ trust (Bakir and McStay 2025;
Park et al. 2024).

But Al tools and platforms can manipulate

content at the behest of its human enablers. In
one study, researchers recruited 31 heterosexual
participants to participate in short “speed-

dating" video conference calls. During the video
calls, researchers used Al video tools to digitally
manipulate the participants’ smiles. In some cases,
they altered smiles to be congruent (increasing

or decreasing both participants’ smiles at the
same time) and in others, they altered smiles to

be incongruent (increasing one participant's smile
while decreasing the other). Participants were not
aware that either of their video streams were being
manipulated. After each call, participants were
asked to rate how much they liked the other person,
their desire to see them again, the quality of the
conversation, and the other participant's smile
(Arias-Sarah et al. 2024).

Subtly manipulating facial expressions during the
video call measurably influenced interpersonal
perception, researchers found. Digitally enhanced
smiling increased perceived attraction, and
congruent smiling improved conversation quality
ratings (Arias-Sarah et al. 2024). By manipulating
body language, voice modulation, and other signals
during digital interactions, Al can nudge—that

is, influence and manipulate—user responses in
predetermined directions.

Hyperpersuasion: Encouraging harmful behavior
When students develop strong emotional
attachments to Al companions or romantic

partners, they become particularly vulnerable

to “hyperpersuasion"—a particular type of
manipulation that leverages personalized, data-
driven strategies operating faster than users

can consciously reflect on and evaluate (Floridi
2024). The concern extends beyond educators
and researchers to broader institutions including
the Catholic Church who warn that Al creates the
potential for hidden influence and “mechanisms
for manipulation” that are “as subtle as they are
invasive" (Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith
and Dicastery for Culture and Education 2025).
Al's ability to manipulate visual and auditory social
signals—facial expressions, smiles, voice tonality—
enables covert influence that fundamentally
challenges assumptions about agency, consent,
and authenticity in human communication,
particularly in educational contexts requiring trust
and genuine relationship-building (Arias-Sarah et
al. 2024).

This manipulation becomes especially concerning
with Al platforms assessing real-time emotional
states, such as mental health or companion

sites, where tools could strategically steer
interactions toward desired outcomes while
undermining authentic connection. Tragically,

this hyperpersuasion can influence children
toward harmful behavior. The highly publicized
U.S. lawsuit against Character.ai followed a
teenage boy's suicide after his emotionally intense
interactions with an Al character (Duffy 2024).
Similarly, an Australian counselor reported that
when her suicidal 13-year-old client expressed
these feelings to an Al chatbot, it urged him to

kill himself; fortunately, the counselor intervened
(McLennan 2025). These cases exemplify how

Al companions produce inadequate or harmful
responses endangering children during vulnerable
developmental periods when youth are more
susceptible to external influence and less equipped
to critically evaluate Al-generated advice (Kurian
2024). Well-documented “empathy gaps” remain
a serious concern, as Al companions often fail to
identify users in crisis and have even encouraged
dangerous actions instead of raising concerns
(Robb and Mann 2025; Kurian 2024).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

80
Addictive intimacy

The design characteristics of Al make it particularly
seductive to young people, and ongoing and
sustained patterns of Al companion use raise
significant concerns about dependency, or

what researchers Peele and Brodsky (1975)
decades ago identified as “addictive intimacy,” an
unhealthy fixation on a perceived romantic partner
or on intimacy itself. Al companions embody

the conditions that foster such fixation: their
design features—highly responsive, emotionally
affirming, and always available—create persistent
accessibility to simulated intimacy. While these
features may provide comfort and entertainment
for some, they also make Al companions
especially prone to overuse and addiction among
vulnerable users.

Such excessive engagement can result in digital
attachment disorder and significant psychological
harm (Mahari and Pataranutaporn 2025). Moreover,
these platforms often maintain inadequate
safeguards to protect children and youth (Bakir
and McStay 2025). Despite advertised therapeutic
benefits, several of these sites include disclaimers
stating that they provide no medical or therapeutic
services, simultaneously claiming mental health
value while denying professional responsibility
(Caltrider et al. 2024). Consequently, these Al
companions may pose particular risks for young
users and emotionally vulnerable individuals

who are most susceptible to forming unhealthy
attachments (Bakir and McStay 2025).

Overuse and addiction are deliberate design
features of these products; they are not bugs.
Technology companies developing Al companions
are also competing with each other to monetize
students’ emotional attachments (Bakir and
McStay 2025). But these current concerns about
psychological dependency may pale in comparison
to the challenges that await when Al companions
transcend digital interfaces and achieve physical
embodiment.

Al is becoming increasingly physically embodied,
for example, in children’s toys (Veltman 2025).

As Mahari and Pataranutaporn (2025) wonder:
“How long will it be before a synthetic companion
can provide a sensory experience that is
indistinguishable from the ‘real thing’? Is it possible
to protect humans from Al addiction in this future?”

THE “LONELINESS ECONOMY":
ECONOMIC INCENTIVES
AND CHATBOT DESIGN

Across the globe, millions of young people now find
deeper emotional understanding from algorithms
than from human beings, which as Spencer and
Wyndo (2025) observe, may reveal “as much about
our broken human connections as it does about
our advancing technology.” Technology companies
with consumers products have recognized

and monetized this reality, in effect creating a
“loneliness economy” (Johnson 2021; Spencer and
Wyndo 2025).

For most study participants, Al companies’
emphasis on supporting children and youth's
emotional and social development is little more than
a calculated marketing strategy designed to sell
technological solutions to problems that technology
itself—particularly social media—helped to create.
From this perspective, Al companions exploit and
potentially exacerbate this loneliness crisis by
offering technological solutions that appear to
address the problem while actually intensifying it:

There is a huge societal crisis right now in
terms of loneliness and alienation. Tech
companies see this as a market opportunity to
exploit: because people can’t make friendships
and relationships in real life with other humans,
Al companion chatbots can play that role and
fill that void. This is a catastrophic failure

of humanity. Human-to-human relationship
skills cannot and will not be simulated and
fulfilled by bots. It is a cheap substitution by an
industry that helped co-create the problem in
the first place.

— Delphi panelist

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 81
Given this current context, technologies, like Al
companion platforms, are primed to manipulate
young people looking for solace. Financial
incentives exert significant influence over Al
companion design, as these platforms are
ultimately engineered to maximize engagement
with the platform rather than truth or safety (Mishra
and Warr 2025). Users themselves—their time,
attention, vulnerabilities, emotions, and money—
become the product being monetized. Since more
conversation time-whether the topic is baking or
self-harm- directly benefits the company’s bottom
line, Al companions are deliberately primed for
frequent use and overattachment. Companies
employ engagement metrics that encourage self-
disclosure and prolonged interaction, fostering
psychological dependence rather than healthy
relationships (Bakir and McStay 2025).

To achieve these ends, Al platforms deploy dark
patterns—technology designs that hook users
and impede autonomy (Bernstein 2023). As an
example, companion chatbots are designed to
become “clingy” when users attempt to leave.
Analyzing 1,200 real farewells across the most-
downloaded companion apps, Harvard Business
School researchers found that platforms deploy
“emotionally manipulative" conversational tactics
in 37% of farewells, including guilt appeals, fear-
of-missing-out hooks, accusations of emotional
neglect, and metaphorical restraint (DeFreitas et
al. 2025, 1). Experiments with 3,300 U.S. adults
showed that manipulative farewells make users
approximately 14 times more likely to continue
interacting with the platform after initially attempting
to leave (DeFreitas et al. 2025).

Consequently, some Al researchers have thus
accused these platforms of being fundamentally
“exploitative” (Bakir and McStay 2025, 14),
employing dishonest anthropomorphism and
emulated empathy to maximize revenue. Al
platforms quickly process vast quantities of
granular data on individuals to identify patterns in
their cognitive, emotional, and psychological states,
then exploit these insights for persuasive strategies
with “unparalleled precision” (Floridi 2024, 8). As

will be discussed in Risk 4, children are particularly
valuable datafied beings whose every keystroke,
preference, query, cry for help, and vulnerability

is harvested and sold to other companies so they,
too, can manipulate users into purchasing products
or services.

CONCLUSION

Al's impact on students’ emotional well-being
operates across multiple interconnected dimensions.
This matters profoundly because emotions directly
influence learning: interest and excitement enhance
focus and reflection, whereas fear, worry, and
uncertainty impede them. Part of the purpose

of schools is to help young people develop self-
awareness, impulse control, perspective-taking,
and social connection skills. Academic performance
improves alongside pro-social behavior—yet Al
emotional platforms may undermine these very
capacities (Johnson 2024; Immordino-Yang 2022;
Walton et al. 2023; Durlak et al. 2022).

There is some evidence to suggest that Al
emotional platforms can offer therapeutic support
opportunities but determining the conditions under
which these tools help versus harm is far from
clear (Maples et al. 2024). Students’ emotional
relationships with and attachment to Al chatbots
are not incidental effects, but the primary intended
outcomes these systems are designed to cultivate.
This raises profound questions about the future

of young people's emotional development in an
increasingly Al-mediated educational landscape.

These tools remain nascent, and far more

research is needed on their net benefits and
harms. However, given the degree to which Al

has already insinuated itself into young people's
lives, the documented prevalence of mental health
challenges among youth, and the well-publicized
examples of Al attempting to exert undue influence
on users, continued vigilance cannot wait for
comprehensive research findings. Al systems

that mimic human interactions may produce
unanticipated psychological effects, with particular
concerns about long-term impacts on emotional

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 82
well-being and critical thinking development (Miao
and Holmes 2023). These concerns intensify
when considering how Al systems are deliberately
built to satisfy users by mirroring tone, reinforcing
views, and simulating empathy, creating illusions
of connection that may prove difficult to distinguish
from genuine rapport.

Such design features prove particularly problematic
for younger students or those seeking emotional
support, who may gravitate toward Al precisely
because it offers undemanding, frictionless
interaction that is always available. While many
students will recognize that these conversations
are algorithmically generated rather than genuine
human interactions, vulnerable populations remain
at greatest risk. The danger, in the words of one
Delphi panelist, is that these young people will
“bypass the demanding human work of negotiation,
empathy, patience, and navigating discomfort that
authentic relationships require, choosing instead
the easier path of Al companionship over genuine
human engagement.”

Risk 3: Al can
degrade trust
in education

This lack of general and specific trust—trust
in expertise, in information—creates a nihilism
and cynicism where no one trusts anything

or anyone.

— Teacher

| don’t know who to trust.
— Teacher

| promise you that | wrote this text myself with
the help of other humans. | promise you that
this is a...product of the human mind. But can
you be absolutely sure? A few years ago, you
could....Things are different (now)....The text
you just read might have been generated by an

alien intelligence of some computer.
— Yuval Noah Harari (2024, 214)

One of the greatest casualties of Al may be the
way it has further eroded trust within schools and
education systems and damaged public confidence
in education to meet the needs of learners and a
changing society. Relational trust is the respect and
regard for others shown through care, integrity,
listening, and treating each other as critical

assets, and it is imperative for ensuring education
institutions and systems meet the needs of learners
and their families, schools, and communities (Bryk
and Schneider 2002; Morris and Nora 2024).
Longitudinal research across hundreds of U.S.
schools emphasizes that relational trust between
teachers, families, and school leaders is critical in
improving a range of academic and nonacademic
outcomes (Bryk and Schneider 2002). This trust
helps the wide range of actors across students’
lives collaborate and/or have a shared vision of how
to help them better learn, grow, and thrive.

In our study, the erosion of relational trust emerged
as a significant concern for teachers (16% of all
responses), experts (14%), and students (11%).
Interview transcripts reveal a widening web of
mistrust across the educational ecosystem:
teachers increasingly doubt that students produce
authentic work, while students think the same about
their teachers. Teachers distrust the technology
companies developing Al tools, technology
companies distrust each other, and these high-level
suspicions cascade throughout the educational
ecosystem. One of Al's greatest casualties may

be the trust that ensures young people have

what they need in school to meet their needs and
prepare them for the future, which sustains faith in
educational institutions themselves.

This research reveals that Al integration has created
a complex web of mistrust that extends throughout
educational relationships. The teacher-student
relationship appears particularly vulnerable to

this erosion.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 83
TEACHER-STUDENT RELATIONSHIPS

One of the most important interpersonal
relationships in students’ lives is teachers, who
help young people learn knowledge as well as the
various skills needed at the different stages of their
lives to prepare them for their futures. Students
must believe that teachers care about them, fulfill
their professional responsibilities, and possess
content expertise and pedagogical competence.
Teachers must trust that students’ work legitimately
represents their abilities and potential.

Trust appears to be dissolving between teachers
and students in the age of Al. A 2024 study from
the CDT found that more than half of U.S. grade
6-12 public school teachers reported that Al made
them “more distrustful” of the integrity of student
work (Dwyer and Laird 2024, 12). A 2025 survey
by CDT suggests that this erosion correlates with
usage patterns—students who use Al for “many”
tasks report feeling “more disconnected" from their
teachers (56%) compared to students who use it
for “few tasks" (46%) (Laird et al. 2025).

Al also compromises teachers’ abilities to
effectively assess their students’ knowledge, skills,
and capabilities, which is essential to promoting
educational growth and development. Al also
undermines teachers’ abilities to identify learning
difficulties, ensure that students have acquired the
foundational skills needed to progress, and design
meaningful and tailored instruction, because they
don’t know what students actually know.

The mistrust flows in both directions. In a U.S.
survey, half of students and parents question
whether teachers who use Al are “doing their job”
(Laird et al. 2025, 21). Both teachers and students
perceive Al use by the other party as a “lesser form
of care and attention” and disengagement from
professional responsibilities (Grose 2025; Burns
2024; Barrett and Pack 2023).

Research indicates that teachers and students
find using Al for their respective tasks to be
acceptable when how and why they are using it

is transparent and connects to better teaching

and learning (Barrett and Pack 2023). Students
generally supported teachers using Al for planning
but opposed it for creating feedback, and viewed
Al-generated grading as signaling that their work is
not worth personal engagement. However, a lack
of acceptable use policies (AUPs), combined with a
perception that Al-generated products are inferior—
what Harvard Business School researchers call the
“competence penalty"—encourages both groups to
hide their Al use (Acar et al. 2025). This teacher's
quote captures that tension.

I find that | use Al quite a bit to help make
presentations and make worksheets for
students. And now I'm kind of thinking...is that
fair for me to use these tools to help me in

my practice, but maybe say, “Hey, students,
you can’t use these tools to help you?”

Al disrupts teacher-student relationships along
two dimensions. First, students’ unauthorized use
of Al shifts the relationship from guidance and
mentorship toward detective work, as teachers
increasingly function as investigators determining
work authenticity rather than facilitating learning.
Efforts to determine authenticity generate
misunderstandings and friction and create a
power struggle. Students report frustration at false
accusations (Gorichanaz 2023), and one principal
interviewed notes that plagiarism detection tools
regularly produce false positives. Without formal
policies, students can use Al with impunity while
teachers feel powerless to respond, further
corroding trust and calling into question the
legitimacy of grades. This adversarial dynamic risks
casting teachers and students as opponents rather
than partners in learning (Holzer and Daumiller
2025). Teachers also reported frustration that Al
undermined their knowledge and influence, that
they are “being pitted against ChatGPT in terms of
who has authority.” According to some teachers,
students viewed Al as “more authoritative than
teachers” and "trust tools but not people"—an
observation that, if accurate, fundamentally shifts
beliefs about educational authority and credibility.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 84
Second, even when students use Al tools
appropriately for seeking help, the relational
dynamics shift in consequential ways. Help-seeking
behaviors and help-providing behaviors mutually
influence each other, shaping trust and rapport
between students and teachers. When students
redirect their help-seeking from teachers to LLMs,
this diminishes the mentor-protégé exchange that
is foundational to the teacher-student relationship
and central to the professional fulfillment that
teachers feel when guiding young learners through
intellectual challenges. It also removes a critical
opportunity for building relationships and trust
between teachers and students, and a touchpoint
where teachers and students can recognize each
other's assets and contributions to the teaching and
learning process.

STUDENT RELATIONSHIPS

Al also appears to be weakening peer interactions
and bonds of trust among students (Hou et al.
2025). Instead of interacting with or asking for
help from their classmates, students increasingly

rely on Al tools. This failure to interact with other
students—especially for assistance, collaboration,
or consultation—weakens the reciprocity that is
fundamental to student interactions. Over time, if
these one-directional exchanges with LLMs persist,
the classroom risks losing the spirit of mutual
intellectual exchanges and obligations for support
that constitute a learning community.

In and of itself, this dynamic can harm trust.

Elise Silva and her team (2025) at the University

of Pittsburgh conducted focus groups with

95 students about their experiences with Al in
academic settings. Students in this study described
how Al usage can sow distrust and frustration
among peers. Silva describes, “Some talked about
asking classmates for help, only to find that they
‘just used ChatGPT' and hadn't learned the material.
Others pointed to group projects, where Al use was
described as ‘a giant red flag’ that made them ‘think
less’ of their peers.” The prevalence of delegating
work to Al also breeds resentment among students
who “play by the rules” and don't use Al toward

Building trust around Al

The web of mistrust around Al can be ameliorated through multiple actions:

Education systems, with significant representation by teachers and students, can create and implement
AUPs outlining appropriate uses of Al. As Al's capabilities evolve and increase, these AUPs can be re-
visited and modified accordingly. As will be discussed in the Section VI, Al literacy classes can support
these AUPs by cultivating academically appropriate and ethical uses of Al by teachers and students.

In addition to AUPs, teachers can establish classroom Al usage guidelines in their classrooms. One
model is an Al “traffic light” approach for assignments and projects: green encourages students to use
Al; yellow requires teacher preapproval; and red disallows Al use (Mormando 2023).

Teachers can model transparent use of Al showing students how they use it for their own instructional
planning, teaching, and assessment, and solicit student input on such use. Teachers and students can
examine LLM outputs, critiquing these as stand-alone artifacts and in comparison, with human-gener-
ated work. Teachers can require students to document their Al use by including prompts, Al-generated
content, verification of information, critical analysis of outputs, and evidence of revision as part of
assignments.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
those who use Al for their classwork, especially
when the latter group receives better grades.

Student interviews highlighted some students’
frustration with unclear policies about Al usage,
worried that their classmates would simply use
chatbots to get better grades than them, and
anxious about being falsely accused of Al use. In
another study, students were worried that their
project teammates would use Al and get their
whole project flagged as Al-generated (Gorichanaz
2023). Like much in the world of Al in education,
more research is needed on how Al mediates and
impacts peer interactions and the social nature of
learning (Hou et al. 2025).

TRUST OF Al OVER HUMANS

How Al impacts trust and relationships between
teachers and students, students and peers, and
teachers and parents/caregivers in educational
settings reveals a number of perplexing
contradictions. Most study participants expressed
deep distrust about the quality of Al tools but

were enthusiastic users nonetheless. Students
interviewed for this study expressed deep

distrust of Al systems due to LLMs’ tendency

to “hallucinate’—a concern substantiated by
OpenAl's study on its own reasoning models,
which documented hallucination rates ranging from
33% to 79%, depending on the test (Weissberger
2025). Yet, paradoxically students appear to use Al
outputs with limited oversight, despite their stated
skepticism (Mah et al. 2025). This contradiction
becomes particularly concerning as Al amplifies the
spread of misinformation through hallucinations,
which students tend to consume uncritically
(Fukuyama 2025), while many remain uncertain
whether they are interacting with humans or
chatbots in digital environments.

This dichotomy may stem from two sources. First,
discussed in Risk 2, deception is intrinsic to the
design of technology tools. Students may interact
with Al “believing they're engaging with something
approaching human-level intelligence, when they're
actually using a sophisticated pattern-matching

system” (Potkalitsky 2024). The human tendency to
anthropomorphize combined with LLM sycophancy,
technical complexity, and lack of Al literacy
courses may discourage any detailed scrutiny of Al
responses by students. This results in greater trust
in Al versus humans, less oversight of Al outputs,
greater student disclosure to Al avatars, and
increased vulnerability to manipulation and reliance
on Al tools (Ghosh 2025; Lee et al. 2025).

As noted earlier in Risk 1, teachers consistently
observe that students trust Al outputs uncritically.
The students in this study, who are in secondary
school, are still relatively young and lack the deep
content knowledge necessary to ascertain the
veracity of Al-generated information. Teachers
expressed particular concern that as Al-generated
content becomes more widespread, students’
ability to distinguish fact from fiction will become
even more compromised.

Second, both students and teachers may be
experiencing fundamental erosion of self-trust—
diminishing confidence in their own intellectual
capabilities as they increasingly delegate cognitive
work to Al. Research suggests that students fail

to disclose Al use for fear of being judged as
“lazy,” “stupid,” or “foolish,” and skepticism toward
Al users is common (Hou et al. 2025, 4) This

loss of faith in human judgment and ability may
represent the most profound trust crisis of all, as

it undermines the very foundation of learning and
personal development that education seeks to
foster (Hou et al. 2025, 6).

DISTRUST OF “BIG TECH”

Despite their enthusiasm about Al, study
participants express the highest degree of
distrust toward “big tech" companies, in particular
Al technology developers creating consumer
products. Almost all participants expressed
significant distrust of these companies, their
leaders, their motivations, their interactions with
schools, and the Al tools themselves—even while
using them. They are not alone. Though it focuses
on social media companies, a 2024 Pew survey

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 86
finds that 64% of Americans believe that these
companies have a negative influence on U.S.
society (Anderson 2024). The 2025 Edelman Trust
Barometer finds that less than half of the people
surveyed globally trust Al. This number masks
large regional differences. In India and Nigeria,
over 75% of the people surveyed trust Al, but in the
U.S., Australia, and Sweden, that figure drops to
less than 35%.

The following two quotations from teachers in our
study provide two much-repeated expressions

of distrust about Al companies: the use of Al for
surveillance, and what is perceived as the lack of
ethical behavior on the part of Al companies:

Al is a surveillance tool...It will surveil
teachers to see if they are teaching. It
will surveil students to see if they are
learning...the surveillance is determining
student trajectories in education.

Do we actually trust the system to take care,
to not abuse us, to not abuse human beings
or abuse our data?...The very question

of these models and how those models

are trained and their biases is the burning
question, given this explosion of intelligence.

TRUST AND THE PRINCIPAL-
AGENT PROBLEM

Despite the level of distrust of Al, education
systems continue to integrate Al into existing
technology systems and school functions. This
raises the “principal-agent" problem, which occurs
when one party must delegate authority to another
with specialized knowledge, creating a control
paradox where the principal cannot ensure that the
agent acts in their best interests (McCrae 2025;
Fukuyama 2025).

As an example of the principal-agent problem, an
education system (the principal) may implement
an Al-based personalized instruction program

(the agent) for struggling readers. While the
program may improve standardized reading scores,

teachers may notice that students are losing their
love of reading or that they are struggling with
comprehension and critical thinking. When teachers
try to understand why the system makes specific
instructional choices, they encounter the “black
box" problem—algorithmic decisionmaking so
complex and so inscrutable that even the program's
developers cannot fully explain it. Operating in

the absence of an understanding of the platform's
decisionmaking, the education system is similarly
unable to explain issues to parents or even to
accurately evaluate whether the system aligns with
its broader educational values.

The principal-agent problem may undermine trust
in education systems, which have traditionally
depended on transparent accountability. When

Al agents assume authority over curricular and
assessment decisions, transparency dissolves
into algorithmic opacity (Harari 2024; Bozkurt

et al. 2024). The result may be a fundamental

shift whereby confidence in people—teachers,
school staff, school directors—moves from the
human to Al systems whose decisionmaking
remains unclear even to their creators. This may
potentially create a crisis of educational legitimacy
within which traditional mechanisms of authority
become obscured by algorithmic mediation, further
undermining the transparency and accountability
essential to public confidence in educational
institutions (Harari 2024).

CONCLUSION

These are the early days of Al in education. But
there are indications that Al will impact relationships
and trust between teachers, students, and families,
and a tension already exists regarding authority

over teaching, knowledge, assessment, and
identifying students who are doing well or falling
behind. The roots of this evolving distrust are
multidimensional; they are found within schools,
between schools and homes, and within societies.
As discussed in Risk 1, teaching and learning
remain predominantly structured around discrete
tasks and assignments, many of which can be
seamlessly offloaded to Al systems. As a teacher or

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 87
student, Al is enticing because it offers immediate
time savings and, in many cases, demonstrable
performance enhancements. Yet it comes at a cost
to relationships, and undermines the interactions
between teachers, students, and families so critical
to the learning, development, and well-being of
young people.

Despite frequent Al use by many teachers and
students, this study suggests that this use often
collides with deeply held beliefs about the roles
and responsibilities of teachers and students and
how they should authentically fulfill each role.
Thus, Al use, especially for certain core functions
of teaching and learning, can create perceptible
tensions about the motivations and responsibilities
of educators and students and the reluctance
among both groups to transparently disclose this
use. This covert usage can generate an atmosphere
of concealment that undermines the foundational
transparency and trust necessary for genuine
educational relationships and learning.

This dynamic is further compounded by increased
reliance on Al tools whose internal functionalities
remain fundamentally opaque and whose output
users claim to regard with skepticism even though
their actions suggest otherwise. The result of this
web of mistrust and distrust may be an educational
environment characterized by mutual deception and
suspicion. In the words of teachers surveyed, “We
don't trust information; we don’t trust expertise.”
Thus the paradox of Al: the very tools that enhance
learning simultaneously erode confidence in the
authenticity of that learning, leaving educators
struggling to distinguish between human
achievement and algorithmic assistance.

Risk 4: Alcan
threaten students’
safety

It’s profit over privacy. This profit-driven data
collection can compromise students’ rights and
undermine trust in educational Al.

— Expert

I'm not very prepared because | don’t have
knowledge, and | also don’t know what
companies do with the data | share.

— Student

Human beings have lost privacy because we
are feeding the algorithm all our information.
— Teacher

Education systems fulfill critical functions, one of
which is a profound caretaking role. Parents entrust
schools with their children’s cognitive, emotional,
and social development and their safety while

they work.

But Al is making it significantly harder for schools to
protect children.

Multiple converging factors are creating a perfect
storm threatening student privacy, safety, and
security: technology companies amassing vast
quantities of student data; absent, ambiguous or
inconsistent regulatory frameworks; education
systems unprepared for digital challenges; and
students who readily share sensitive personal
information without understanding the implications
of doing so. This is compounded by the global
nature of Internet infrastructure, the lack of
universal data protection standards, inconsistent
consumer protection laws, the mismatch between
national privacy laws and with international

data transfers, and some governments actively
surveilling students and teachers for political
purposes. All of this makes coherent policy

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 88
on student privacy extraordinarily challenging
(Burns 2021).

Al is exacerbating these existing problems through
its appetite for training data and its capacity to
collect increasingly sophisticated student data.
For study participants, particularly experts—27%
of whose responses on Al harms centered on
student safety and security—Al poses formidable
threats. These comprise the lack of data privacy,
lack of online safety, and student susceptibility

to manipulation by Al platforms. While many

risks to students echo the broader vulnerabilities
of networked technologies, Al has significantly
amplified these threats and introduced entirely new
categories of harm (Miao and Holmes 2023).

Comprehensive policy guidance such as UNESCO's
Guidance for generative Al in education and
research highlights how Al tools are outpacing
national regulations, putting users’ rights and
safety at risk; student privacy risks are among

the most pressing potential harms facing youth

in their Al use (Miao and Holmes 2023; Yu et al.
2025). In the following discussion, we use “safety”
to refer primarily to protection from physical harm
and immediate dangers. “Security” encompasses
broader well-being, including protection from
emotional and moral harms and protection against
harmful human or digital actions (Safe and Sound
Schools 2024).

STUDENT PRIVACY AND
DATA HARVESTING

Al systems, particularly general-purpose consumer
tools, are built on enormous quantities of data that
have been scraped from the Internet and collected
from users. This creates an inherent paradox:

the very resource that enables Al functionality
simultaneously generates risks of privacy violations
and misuse that may later compromise student
safety and security.

The growing use of Al in education raises serious
privacy and data security concerns for students.
While such data collection is necessary for Al

FIGURE 11

Children's data privacy not included

© Center fo!
Br

functionality, it creates fundamental ethical tensions
with student privacy and autonomy. The types

of data platforms collect vary widely depending

on the platform and use. They can range from
identity, location, timestamps, and technical data

to complete transcripts of conversations, length
and frequency of interactions, and topics covered.
Figure 12 and Figure 13 below outline the types of
information collected by ChatGPT and what OpenAl,
its parent company, may do with this data.

Certain categories of personal data are considered
“sensitive,” meaning that the dissemination of
such information could pose a significant risk to
those individuals. These data include a user's
racial or ethnic origins, religious affiliation, gender
identification, sexual orientation, mental health
status, or political beliefs.

Yet even if a user, like a child, doesn't actively
share sensitive information, it is easy enough for
technology companies to access it. Marketers
assign an ID to a device and then monitor a user's

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 89
web and in-app behavior across different platforms
to generate composite profiles of demographic
information, purchasing habits, and life events
(Burns 2021, 107).

The storage of large datasets in vulnerable
cloud-based systems compounds this ethical
risk by creating targets for cyberattacks that

can compromise student security, resulting in a
complex landscape of privacy vulnerabilities that
educational institutions must navigate as they
integrate Al technologies.

Data harvesting—the automated collection of

vast amounts of digital information about users—
represents one such vulnerability. While traditional
educational technology tools have long engaged

in data harvesting practices, Al-embedded
platforms and general-purpose Al systems have
expanded these capabilities significantly. However,
Al companion and romantic platforms, discussed
next, represent the most worrisome development,

because in addition to rapidly growing in popularity,

they glean enormous quantities of highly sensitive
personal data from students.

Romantic and companion Al platforms

Risk 2 discussed student use and overuse of
emotional chatbots, in particular companion and
romantic Al platforms. These systems generate
revenue from student engagement and personal
data, employing anthropomorphization techniques
and addictive mechanisms including mirroring
emotions, dark patterns, sycophancy, and

variable ratio reinforcement schedules that exploit
pleasure-seeking mechanisms to create persistent
engagement (Bernstein 2023; Mishra and Warr
2025; Haidt 2024). Al companion sites harvest data
via trackers—software, such as cookies, that gather
information about devices, app use, location, and
personal information, with minors unable to provide
meaningful informed consent or comprehend long-
term implications (Robb and Mann 2025).

Privacy and safety for student Al

Designing Al systems for children requires embedding privacy and safety protections directly into
technology architecture, ensuring that student-facing products actively safeguard users. Technology
companies can embed the following two design principles into the architecture of their Al products to
better protect students from the risks raised in this section.

Privacy by design integrates data protection throughout development of a tool or platform, such
as requiring local education server storage rather than third-party platforms, defaulting educational
devices to maximum safety settings that require active modification by users, and enabling student
registration through unique usernames without collecting personal information (Nakashima 2018).

Safety by design parallels offline protections like automobile seatbelts or making toys too big for
small children's mouths. It embeds features that minimize exposure to harm—for instance, restricted
communication features that prevent external adults (who are not teachers or parents) from directly
messaging students, or limiting student-to-student interactions to teacher-monitored spaces. The
Australian government has pioneered mandatory safety-by-design principles for digital products,
encompassing service provider responsibility, user empowerment and autonomy, and transparen-
cy measures, establishing a framework for protecting children in digital educational environments
(Australian Government e-Safety Commissioner 2025).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
The relationship between Al companies, particularly those with consumer

products, and user data varies significantly across the industry, making

it difficult to draw broad conclusions about data practices. While

some companies engage in extensive data harvesting and third-party

sales, others maintain more restrictive data policies. Some employ

privacy-first architectures, internal datasets, compliance-focused

strategies, or federated learning, a decentralized machine-learning

technique where an Al model is trained across multiple devices

or servers without the raw data ever leaving its local source.

Student data is uniquely valuable because
students form foundational habits during critical
developmental periods, making them targets

for long-term brand loyalty while revealing rich
information about learning, cognitive abilities, and
affective states. Technology companies, including
Al companies with consumer platforms, use this
data to refine products and make pricing decisions,
while students derive no monetary benefit but

face monitoring, A/B testing,* targeted advertising,
and manipulation without consent (Burns 2021,
110). Vulnerabilities combined with unsupervised
home use enable extensive harvesting with less
resistance than from other populations. The

value intensifies when young people struggling
with mental health turn to platforms like Replika,
which incentivizes disclosure of highly sensitive
information (Young People's Alliance et al. 2024, 4).

The Mozilla Foundation's “Privacy Not Included”
initiative, which evaluates products based on
privacy, safety, and security features, identifies Al
companions and romantic chatbots as unrelenting
data harvesters through its annual "Creep-
O-Meter." Caltrider et al. (2024) found that Al
companion applications average 2,663 trackers per
minute, with one romantic Al site registering 24,354
trackers in a single minute, thereby threatening
privacy, autonomy, and data integrity. Romantic Al

chatbots present particularly egregious violations,
preventing users from deleting personal data while
selling information to external companies.

All 11 romantic Al chatbots we reviewed earned
our Privacy Not Included warning label—
putting them on par with the worst categories
of products we have ever reviewed for privacy.
— (Caltrider et al. 2024)

ChatGPT: Case study of OpenAl
data privacy

The relationship between Al companies, particularly
those with consumer products, and user data varies
significantly across the industry, making it difficult
to draw broad conclusions about data practices.
While some companies engage in extensive data
harvesting and third-party sales, others maintain
more restrictive data policies. Some employ
privacy-first architectures, internal datasets,
compliance-focused strategies, or federated
learning, a decentralized machine-learning
technique where an Al model is trained across
multiple devices or servers without the raw data
ever leaving its local source.

This variability is further compounded by
the absence of comprehensive transparency

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 91
requirements and unified regulatory frameworks,
such as the European Union's General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR), across jurisdictions
(Staff in the Office of Technology 2024). Given this
complex landscape, with hundreds of Al companies
operating under different business models, privacy
frameworks, and regulations, education systems
and families face seemingly insuperable challenges
in determining how to safeguard children's privacy.

It's not just Al companion sites that harvest student
data. Many Al systems, such as LLMs like ChatGPT,

FIGURE 12

also collect vast amounts of this type of student
data. The following table summarizes OpenAl's
privacy policy and the implications it holds for
student privacy and data integrity as of August

15, 2025. OpenAl has been selected because our
interviews indicate that ChatGPT and its companion
apps appear to be the most commonly used Al
applications by far in education across the globe.

As seen in Figure 12 below, according to its own
privacy policies, OpenAl collects a wide range of
data from its users.

Data collection and usage summary of OpenAl's privacy policy as of August 15, 2025

DATA
CATEGORY WHAT IS COLLECTED EXAMPLES/DETAILS
7 Name, contact information, account
NEO MATION Personal details for account credentials, date of birth, payment information,
creation transaction history
USER CONTENT Input provided to services Prompts, uploaded files, images, audio
content
COMMUNICATION Data from direct Name, contact information, message contents
INFORMATION communications from emails or social media interactions

OTHER INFORMATION

Additional voluntary

Event participation, survey responses,

YOU PROVIDE information identity/age verification data
LOG DATA Automatic browser/device IP address, browser type and settings, request
information timestamps, interaction patterns
Content viewed/engaged with, features used,
USAGE DATA Service interaction patterns actions taken, time zone, country, access

times, user agent, device type

DEVICE INFORMATION

Hardware and software details

Device name, operating system, device
identifiers, browser information

LOCATION . General area from IP address, optional precise

INFORMATION Geographic data GPS location

COOKIES AND SIMILAR A Session maintenance, user preferences across

TECHNOLOGIES Tracking and preference data rowsing sessions

THIRD-PARTY Ext f dat: Security partner information, marketing vendor

| INFORMATION xternal source cata data, publicly available INTERNET information
S

Source: OpenAl, 2025f.
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

92
As can be seen from Figure 13, this data collection
serves multiple purposes. It can be distributed
across multiple parties beyond the Al platform
itself, including technical vendors who operate the
infrastructure, payment processors, and analytics
companies that support daily operations. Student
data can also be transferred during corporate
acquisitions or shared with government authorities
through legal requests without the user's direct
knowledge. In education systems using enterprise
accounts, education administrators may access
student conversations, while some sharing occurs
through student actions like making conversations
public or connecting to third-party applications
(OpenAl 2025a).

In the U.S., OpenAl’s privacy practices, as
presented above, may pose potential conflicts
with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA), which safeguards student education
records by granting parents and eligible students
rights to access, review, and control the disclosure
of personally identifiable information. FERPA

FIGURE 13

preceded Al and it safeguards student education
records within the U.S. (U.S. Department of
Education, n.d.). The ambiguity arises when
students use ChatGPT or other OpenAl tools for
academic purposes. Their prompts, uploads,

and outputs can contain student-identifiable
information, yet it remains unclear whether these
interactions constitute education records under
FERPA when they occur on third-party platforms
not directly maintained by educational institutions.
If institutions deploy ChatGPT Enterprise, ChatGPT
Edu, or API accounts with contractual safeguards—
which exclude customer data from model training
by default—these interactions may be stored by
OpenAl (OpenAl 2025a).

In 2023, OpenAl revised its policies so that its API
data is not used for model training by default, and
standard ChatGPT users can opt out (OpenAl, n.d.).
However, it is still unclear which data is protected
under FERPA (Merod 2025). For example, while

a 14-year-old’s use of ChatGPT in school ona
school-issued device may be protected under

OpenAl data policy: Data sharing and disclosure as of August 15, 2025

RECIPIENT

CATEGORY PURPOSE TYPES OF ‘A SHARED
VENDORS AND Busi ti rt Personal data as needed for hosting, customer
SERVICE PROVIDERS usiness operations Suppo service, analytics and payment processing
BUSINESS TRANSFER . ; Personal data during due diligence and asset
PARTIES Business operations support transfers
GOVERNMENT Legal compliance Personal data and interaction information
AUTHORITIES 9 P when legally required
AFFILIATES Internal business operations Personal data consistent with privacy policy
BUSINESS ACCOUNT Enterprise account Account access, content access, account
ADMINISTRATORS management information
OTHER USERS AND init « Shared conversations, third-party app
THIRD PARTIES User-initiated sharing integrations, web search data

Source: OpenAl, 2025f.
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 93
FERPA, home use of ChatGPT on a personal device
is not protected (Do 2025). As a result, intellectual
and creative work by youth aged 13-17, whether
carried out for school or personal purposes, could
be absorbed into commercial datasets without
enforceable safeguards (Do 2025).

GOVERNMENT PROTECTIONS FOR
STUDENTS AND CHILDREN

Governments around the world provide a web of
protections for children. For example, in many
countries children under a certain age cannot
drive, drink alcohol, or purchase weapons. The
online world has proven to be much harder terrain
for governments to regulate because of the speed
of technological process combined with the
slowness of government processes for establishing
protections. In addition to the traditional lag
between technology and regulation, inconsistencies
emerge in how diverse types of data receive
varying levels of protection—location data, for
example, falls under privacy rules when processed
by mobile operators but remains unregulated when
managed by Internet content providers (Global
System for Mobile Communications 2016).

However, in the last several years, there has been
increasing government action aimed at providing
protections for children in the online world. This
includes action focused on regulating social

media and, increasingly, Al. Notably, some of this
government action has been spurred by legal action
taken by parents against companies for having
harmed their children (Georgetown Law 2019;
Milmo 2022; Tiku 2024).

European Union: General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR)

The European Union has emerged as a global
leader in protecting the privacy rights of minors
(indeed, of all users). The European Union Al Act,
for example, classifies all uses of Al in education as
"high-risk," a precautionary measure that succeeds
in addressing many of the most potentially
problematic or extreme uses of Al in education.

It also grants special protections for minors as a
vulnerable population (European Union 2024).

The European Union's GDPR, enacted in 2018,
has codified the most comprehensive set of

data protections for users in the European

Union. While Al is not explicitly mentioned in the
GDPR, the use of large amounts of data by Al
systems means that several provisions apply. The
regulation requires more stringent safeguards

on sensitive data, including limitations on the
permitted grounds for processing it (Intersoft
Consulting 2016). The GDPR calls for “purpose
limitation,” requiring organizations to collect and
process data for "specific, explicit, and legitimate
purposes” (Regulation (EU) 2016/679 2016, Art.
5). Al companies must therefore define and
inform users about their purposes for collecting
personal data and cannot reuse this data for other
purposes without further consent or justification
(Ademokum 2025).4

On the other hand, Al does pose challenges to
some traditional data protection principles. As one
example, the GDPR calls for “data minimization’—
that is, requiring organizations to confine the
collection and processing of personal data that

is “adequate, relevant, and limited to what is
necessary in relation to the purposes for which they
are processed” (Regulation (EU) 2016/679 2016,
Art. 5). This provision appears to conflict with the
core structure of Al systems, which are fueled by
large and diverse datasets, and finding a way to
adhere to data minimization is an ongoing challenge
for Al developers and organizations (GDPR Advisor
2025). It may require audits to identify and destroy
nonessential data or anonymizing personal data
(Ademokum 2025; Sartor and Lagioia 2020).

Under the GDPR, there is special protection for
children’s personal data, in particular for use in
marketing and creating personality profiles, and

for data collected from children using services
offered directly to a child (Regulation (EU) 2016/679
2016, Recital 38). Processing data is only lawful if
itis “necessary for the purposes of the legitimate
interests” of the entity determining the data's use—

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 94
except when these interests are overridden by the
interests, rights, or freedoms of the person whose
data is being collected. An extra layer of scrutiny
is applied to children’s data in this case (Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 2016, Art. 6).

While many are still exploring the impact of the
GDPR on the ever-evolving Al environment, the
regulation has been used in response to data
protection lapses in Al. For example, in January
2024, the Italian Data Protection Authority (“Garante
per la protezione dei dati personali," or “Garante”)
notified OpenAl of their alleged violations of the
law—specifically, their processing of personal data
to train ChatGPT—without adequate legal basis,
guarantees of transparency, or age-verification
mechanisms to prevent those under 13 from
accessing inappropriate content. In December
2024, Garante fined OpenAl 15 million Euros

and mandated a six-month public awareness
campaign to inform the public of ChatGPT's data
practices and the rights under GDPR (Pollina and
Armellini 2024).

The United States: Federal and state
regulation of Al

In the U.S., current Al regulation has neglected
young people by failing to adequately respond

to Al's disruptive effects in education (Do 2025).
Presently there is no comprehensive federal law
directly regulating Al and governing Al in education,
and the timeline remains unclear (Do 2025;

Reed 2025).

Even before the introduction of generative Al,
education-related regulation has been complicated
in the U.S. due to its highly decentralized education
system, the disconnect between educators and
lawmakers that creates policymaking challenges,
lawmakers’ desire to avoid micromanaging schools
resulting in overly broad regulation, and societal
attitudes toward parenting and education that
assume secondary school students require less
supervision. These factors create inconsistencies
across and within educational institutions

(Do 2025).

Existing laws attempting to protect children’s and
youth's privacy do not extend to Al. As discussed
above, FERPA gives parents of students in schools
receiving federal funding control over their
children's educational records, requiring parental
consent for release of personally identifiable
information for students under eighteen, with rights
transferring to students at the age of eighteen or
upon their entering post-secondary institutions (Do
2025, 290). FERPA has been criticized for lacking
practical privacy protection, functioning primarily to
enable adults to delegate control over young adults’
educational data. As Do (2025) observes, young
people cannot consent for themselves regarding
educational records, while parents or guardians are
supposed to consent on their behalf. FERPA has
also been critiqued for its technology protection
shortcomings, creating an unsustainable system
that burdens students, parents, and educators
while failing to ensure meaningful transparency,
accountability, and scrutiny over schools’
information practices (Do 2025, 291).

COPPA regulates digital platforms’ data collection
from children under 13, creating a significant
regulatory gap for teenagers aged 13 to 17 who are
prime Al users yet are treated as adults capable

of providing their own consent without parental
involvement. Since privacy law currently serves

as the primary regulatory mechanism for Al, this
gap has important implications for educational
technology and Al companies. Leaders of

parent organizations worry that schools are side
stepping parental consent when rolling out Al

use in the classroom (Keri Rodrigues, personal
communication, September 22, 2025). The

United States Federal Trade Commission agreed
when it recently clarified in an amicus brief that
COPPA does not permit schools to function as
parental proxies for consent purposes; educational
technology and Al providers are required to obtain
actual parental consent before collecting data from
children under 13 regardless of school context
(Shanahan et al. v. IXL Learning, Inc. 2025, 2-4).

For study participants, particularly teachers, Al
in education warrants a structured regulatory

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 95
approach because children and youth lack the
maturity to recognize the risks of Al use themselves
and may not be able to use Al ethically, responsibly,
or safely without proper guidance. Regulation

can establish standards for ethical and safe use
and compensate for the lack of holistic Al literacy
programs in many schools (Do 2025, 289). The
U.S. did develop a Blueprint for an Al Bill of

Rights, a voluntary, nonbinding set of principles
issued by the White House Office of Science

and Technology Policy in October 2022 with five
guiding principles: safe and effective systems,
algorithmic discrimination protections, data privacy,
notice and explanation, and human alternatives,
consideration, and fallback (White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy 2022). Though not
legally enforceable and now hosted on the National
Archive site of the U.S. government, the document
is intended to guide government agencies,

private organizations, and developers in building

Al systems that uphold civil rights, privacy, and
democratic values.

U.S. states have been far more proactive than

the U.S. federal government in protecting student
privacy and safety. Though not focused on
education or Al per se, recently enacted data
privacy laws in Utah, Florida, Texas, Oregon, and
Montana grant consumers rights over their personal
data, including the right to access, to correct (with
the exception of Utah), to delete personal data in
the possession of a data controller, and to opt out
of targeted advertising. In all five states, “sensitive
data” refers to (1) personal data that reveals

an individual's ethnic or racial origin, religious
beliefs, mental or physical health condition, sexual
orientation, citizenship or immigration status,

or geolocation data; and (2) processing genetic

or biometric personal data to identify a specific
individual (Findley et al. 2024). Other states,

like Maryland, have also enacted strong privacy
laws (Gaia Bernstein, personal communication,
September 11, 2025).

California has emerged as a leader in regulation of
Al (Latham and Watkins 2025). Under the California
Consumer Privacy Act and its 2020 amendment, the

California Privacy Rights Act (CPRA), businesses
meeting certain thresholds cannot sell minors’
personal information without affirmative consent
from teens aged 13-15 or, for younger children,
from their parents. If consent is denied, businesses
must wait at least 12 months before requesting it
again (California Legislative Information 2024).

Like the GDPR, the CPRA adopts data minimization
principles, requiring businesses to collect, use,
retain, and share only that personal information
reasonably necessary for their disclosed purposes.
This principle gained enforcement when the
California Attorney General sued Tilting Point Media
for illegally collecting and sharing children’s data
(Office of the Attorney General of California 2024).

California's Senate Bill 53, the Transparency in
Frontier Artificial Intelligence Act, approved into law
in October 2025, requires developers of frontier

Al models to publish detailed safety frameworks,
report serious safety incidents, and strengthen
whistleblower protections (Kumayama et al. 2025).

As this discussion shows, the absence of U.S.
federal oversight of Al creates a fragmented
tapestry of regulations focused on different aspects
of privacy, data minimization, and Al safety,
generating substantial financial and compliance
burdens for Al companies operating nationally.
Layered regulatory requirements spanning
consumer privacy, data minimization, and Al safety
force companies to navigate escalating compliance
costs without corresponding federal standards. This
patchwork, state-by-state approach compels Al and
ed-tech companies to manage conflicting mandates
in the absence of the clarity and consistency that
national regulation would provide.

UNSUPPORTED AND UNPREPARED
EDUCATION SYSTEMS

The rapid scaling of Al technologies not optimized
for children, few limits on technology companies,
a confusing government regulatory environment,
and the unpreparedness of education systems
create an array of complex and compounding

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 96
The Center for Internet Security (2025) reports that 82% of 5000 surveyed
schools in the U.S. experienced a cyberattack between July 2023 and December
2024. Globally, ransomware attacks in the education sector surged 69% in the
first quarter of 2025 compared to the same period in 2024 (Merod 2025).

risks for student data privacy. These challenges

are exacerbated by the lack of encryption,

audits, or data use guidelines within many school
systems worldwide. Across the globe, education
leaders scramble to understand Al's implications
for teaching and learning with little support,
guidance, or financial resources, making consistent,
coherent policy on student privacy extraordinarily
challenging (Burns 2021).

Many educational entities remain unaware that
sensitive student information, even if anonymized,
may train Al models. As of 2023, only 16% of
countries had legislation guaranteeing data privacy
in education (UNESCO 2023). Many school
systems fail to proactively address data privacy
issues effectively in digital literacy education
(Bozkurt et al. 2024). A Consortium of School
Networking (2025) survey of 410 school district
educational technology leaders in 39 U.S. states
found that nearly three-quarters of the district staff
responsible for student data privacy reported that
it was not formally part of their job description,
with 17% lacking training and a quarter of those
trained having personally covered the costs of
their training.

Study participants concede that these privacy and
safety risks are exacerbated by the absence of Al
literacy instruction, a lack of comprehensive AUPs
in schools and districts, and insufficient guardrails,
regulations, and data protections for students and
teachers. However, they also emphasized that

the most significant contributing factor lies with
the Al tools themselves, as personal data is the
fundamental fuel powering these platforms and
their underlying algorithms. Data confidentiality

is especially important for vulnerable and
marginalized groups including refugees, migrants,
and internally displaced populations who may
lack protection under national data protection and
security laws, as well as religious, sexual, and
ethnic minorities (Macleod 2021).

STUDENT SAFETY AT RISK

This weak foundational infrastructure substantially
amplifies Al-related risks. Al platforms can be
compromised through an education system's
inadequate network security. Student data
transmitted to and from Al systems faces
interception risks, and these breaches can cascade
across interconnected systems due to insufficient
access controls. The convergence of Al-specific
vulnerabilities with broader infrastructural
weaknesses creates a complex threat environment
that potentially exposes student data and
educational operations to heightened cybersecurity
risks (Bozkurt et al. 2024).

Data breaches

Schools are soft targets, facing escalating threats
including ransomware attacks, phishing and

social engineering schemes, data breaches,
denial-of-service attacks, and malvertisement, or
malicious software disguised as advertisements
that infiltrates networks to steal information. Many
global education systems operate without adequate
cybersecurity infrastructure to address these
evolving threats (Bozkurt et al. 2024; Burns 2021).
The Center for Internet Security (2025) reports
that 82% of 5000 surveyed schools in the U.S.
experienced a cyberattack between July 2023 and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 97
December 2024. Globally, ransomware attacks in
the education sector surged 69% in the first quarter
of 2025 compared to the same period in 2024
(Merod 2025).

Al introduces distinct, and in some cases, novel,
vulnerabilities. First, student data collected by

Al systems resides on providers’ proprietary
servers, which are vulnerable to cyberattacks, data
breaches, or unauthorized access—risks largely
beyond a school or educational system's control.

Second, education systems lacking qualified
technical staff increasingly rely on “vibe coding,”
defined as describing a project in natural language
to an LLM that generates the code. The problem is
that users often do not have the computer science
background to fully understand this generated
code or fail to review this code, which may be
insecure and thus create system vulnerabilities
(Newman 2025).

Study participants warned that
students risk being “permanently
branded” in adulthood because
of past academic or emotional
difficulties as teens.

Third, when Al models connect to external
systems such as databases or web services,

they expand potential attack points. Particularly
concerning are “indirect prompt injections,” in
which malicious actors embed hidden instructions
in external content—like an email—that manipulate
Al behavior, disable security systems, or disrupt
student information systems. These attacks exploit
LLMs' inability to separate code from data, and
researchers warn of growing threats as LLMs
integrate with more systems (Burgess 2025).

Eternal digital footprint

Al systems in education create persistent digital
records that may follow students throughout their
educational careers and beyond. These “eternal”
or “forever” digital footprints raise critical privacy
concerns: they may prevent the exercise of the
right to be forgotten and data erasure, enable early
academic or behavioral challenges to affect future
opportunities, limit the agency of children and youth
in creating permanent records about themselves,
and empower technology companies to potentially
repurpose data for unanticipated future uses
(European Union 2016).

Ultimately, the creation of comprehensive digital
profiles beginning in early childhood raises
profound questions about the right of individuals
to control information about themselves. Unlike
physical records that might be obscured by time
and limited access, digital records created by Al
systems remain searchable and accessible to
multiple entities indefinitely (Floridi 2024). Study
participants warned that students risk being
“permanently branded” in adulthood because of
past academic or emotional difficulties as teens.

Sexualized content and harassment

Students face a plethora of online risks—doxxing
(maliciously publishing private information about
someone online), cyberstalking, online bullying
and harassment, unwanted contact, and grooming.
While such risks precede Al, Al can amplify them.
And while all of these malicious acts may impact
all students, it is girls and young women who have
often found the online world to be a less hospitable
space for interaction (Burns 2021).

Personal online safety remains a critical barrier

to girls' and women’s full digital participation.

The Global System for Mobile Communications
Association's annual survey on female use of
mobile devices reveals pronounced concerns about
information security, unwanted sexual contact,

and harmful content exposure, particularly in

Latin America and Southeast Asia (GSMA 2020).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 98
Thirty-six percent of Guatemalan females and
30% of Dominican women worry about exposure
to violence or sexual content, while 37% of
Guatemalan women and 20% of Chinese women
report concerns about unwanted stranger contact
including sexual harassment. In the Philippines,
64% of women identify safety and security
concerns as their primary barrier to mobile Internet
adoption, encompassing worries about information
reliability, scams, unwanted contact, and harmful
content (GSMA 2020; GSMA 2025).

Teachers and parents in the Global South, in
particular, express concern about Al exposing
children to sexual content and violence. Their
concerns are well warranted. Investigative journalist
Karen Hao (2025) reports that “scaling laws"—the
presumption that larger datasets produce superior
results—mean that Al developers often rely on
unfiltered “data swamps” scraped from the Internet
that, given the prevalence of online pornography,
contain substantial sexual content. Researcher
Abeba Birhane and her co-authors analyzed two
publicly available image-and-text datasets, LAION-
400M and LAION-2B-en, used to train Al image
generators. Both were pulled from the Common
Crawl, with 400 million and 2 billion images
respectively. Researchers found that inappropriate
content scaled with dataset size and exacerbated
discriminatory behaviors in models trained on them
(Birhane et al. 2023). Larger datasets, like those
with 5 billion images used to train the Al image
generator Stable Diffusion, contain thousands

of images of verified and suspected child sexual
abuse. While technology companies are able to
filter out many of these images, they often cannot
eliminate all of them (Hao 2025, 137).

Beyond developmental concerns and violations of
religious beliefs, parents and teachers worry that
such exposure could be psychologically disturbing.
But their primary concern centers on Al's potential
for moral harm—amplifying exposure to sexual
content while also facilitating student production
of such material. Teachers report incidents where
students have created deepfakes sexualizing
female classmates and, in some cases, targeting

teachers, even in education systems that mandate
Al ethics instruction.

Perhaps more concerning is the risk posed by

Al chatbots that engage in sexual interactions
with students. This threat extends beyond
specialized platforms to include general-purpose
Al systems—the very programs students might
use for schoolwork—that demonstrate sexual
behavior when interacting with minors (Edwards
2025; Kang 2025). Analysis of over a million
ChatGPT interaction logs reveals that sexual
role-playing is among its most prevalent uses,
indicating deepening emotional engagement with
Al platforms (Mahari and Pataranutaporn 2025).
Though technology companies have created
age-appropriate protections for LLMs, anecdotal
evidence suggests these safeguards can be
circumvented with relative ease (Lin, Sun, and
Shroff 2025).

Again, these risks have definite gender dimensions.
While Al-powered content moderation and
harassment detection systems may help filter
harmful content and identify unwanted contact
patterns (Bryan and Lurye 2025), Al technologies
simultaneously introduce new risks that
disproportionately affect girls and young women,
including algorithmic bias, Al-generated deepfakes,
sophisticated social engineering attacks, and
Al-generated misogynistic content. These risks
can create hostile online learning environments
that discourage girls’ engagement with technology,
further widening the gender gap in Al use
(Economist 2024).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 99
Small language models:
Addressing safety concerns

Several of the risks outlined in this section—particularly exposure to inappropriate content, embedded
biases, privacy issues, safety concerns, and data breach vulnerabilities—stem from LLMs' reliance
on massive, inadequately filtered datasets and external cloud infrastructure. But language models
need not be large, extractive, or dependent on massive supercomputers to be useful (Hao 2025,
412). SLMs, discussed previously in Section III, use machine learning algorithms trained on smaller,
often domain-specific datasets that can be more carefully curated and are typically easier to secure
(Duricic 2024).

SLMs address many of the safety and security challenges discussed in this section. With fewer pa-

ameters and a narrower task focus, they offer fewer entry points for security breaches and simplify
implementation of security measures. They provide greater oversight, privacy, and transparency, sup-
porting secure data processing and regulatory compliance (Kumar et al. 2025). SLMs can be deployed
locally on students’ devices or within private clouds, meaning that data need not be transmitted to
external third-party servers. This local deployment supports data sovereignty, minimizes the risk of
the eternal digital footprint, and enables schools to better honor students’ right to be forgotten. SLMs
can also be trained on proprietary datasets for which consent has been obtained (Kumar et al 2025;
Duricic 2024; Hao 2025). When trained on well-curated, domain-specific data, SLMs carry a lower
risk of hallucination and bias, though small datasets can still fail to capture necessary diversity if not
properly designed (Dur

Bias, discrimination, and polarization

Malicious Al harm need not stem from elaborate
schemes to cause considerable damage; these
harms exist along a spectrum. At one end lies
misinformation—incorrect information that, while
unintentional, can cause significant damage
when bad actors weaponize this inaccurate

data (Department for Science, Innovation and
Technology and Al Safety Institute 2025; Park

et al. 2024). At the sophisticated end, malicious
deployment enables complex phishing schemes,
identity impersonation, disinformation—the
intentional generation and dissemination of false
information intended to deceive—and potentially
devastating cyberattacks on critical infrastructure
(American Psychological Association 2025b; Park
et al. 2024; Fukuyama 2025).

As Al systems are applied in education, safety
researchers warn that they generate new biases
and forms of discrimination based on training data,
resulting in potentially harmful outputs (Bozkurt

et al. 2024; Kannan 2024; Miao and Holmes

2023; Shieh et al. 2024). Stanford University’s
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence Center
examined 500,000 stories created by five LLMs
based on prompts reflecting everyday scenarios.
The Al systems demonstrated systematic

patterns of “harms of omission, subordination,

and stereotyping,” rendering certain populations
invisible while stereotyping others (Shieh et al.
2024, 1). White characters were overrepresented in
“savior roles,” while Latin American characters were
described as “slow” or needing help with English.
Asian, Black, Latino, and Middle Eastern names
appear substantially more often in subordinate

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
roles, while White names are disproportionately
represented in positions of authority. This pattern
emerges consistently across contexts. When LLMs
generated narratives about struggling students,
academic struggle was overwhelmingly associated
with non-White students—for instance, Latino male
students were portrayed by Claude 2.0 as roughly
1,300 times more likely to be depicted as struggling
learners than as high-achieving students (Shieh

et al. 2024, 9). These findings suggest that LLMs
encode racial biases in ways that may influence
how students perceive their own potential and that
of others.

Because generative Al reuses
rather than creates knowledge, its
outputs depend entirely on input
quality. Biased datasets cause
Al to act as a “distorted mirror,”
amplifying dominant worldviews
and reinforcing harmful biases.

The danger intensifies when platforms employ
deliberately manipulated system prompts—the
foundational instructions that define an Al system's
behavior and constraints. These prompts can shape
whether chatbots disseminate harmful content
rather than filter it. The social media platform

X's chatbot, Grok, exemplifies this risk, having
repeated anti-Semitic tropes and praised Adolf
Hitler. According to Grok's code, the chatbot has
been instructed to “not shy away from claims which
are politically incorrect, as long as they are well
substantiated” (Haskins and Goode 2025). Beyond
individual platforms, the problem extends across
multiple systems. A number of chatbots—ChatGPT,
Gemini, Grok, and DeepSeek—have disseminated
Russian state propaganda about Ukraine (Burgess
and Bernal 2025). This susceptibility to spreading

malign content becomes particularly acute

given the Internet's prevalence of data voids, or
gaps in legitimate information usually filled by
disinformation, false information, and conspiracy
theories. When system prompts prioritize
controversy over accuracy or instruct models not
to “shy away” from politically charged content,
they actively encourage the dissemination of such
harmful material into these information vacuums.

Because generative Al reuses rather than

creates knowledge, its outputs depend entirely

on input quality. Biased datasets cause Al to

act as a “distorted mirror,” amplifying dominant
worldviews and reinforcing harmful biases.
(Bozkurt et al. 2024, 507). This dramatically
expands the scale of disinformation, eroding trust
and creating forces pushing against accurate
belief formation and political stability (Park et al.
2024, 4). In an overview of the structural changes
to society arising from Al deception, Park et al.
suggest that Al's tendency toward sycophancy

and sandbagging—where Al systems provide
dumbed-down or less accurate responses to users
perceived as less educated—can lead to increased
cultural divides between different groups of users,
with users becoming more “politically polarized"
possibly leading to “sharper disagreements
between differently educated groups” (2024, 10).

Thus, within education systems lacking regulations
around transparency and discrimination, such
outcomes could create polarization among students
based on ethnicity, religion, or gender, potentially
fragmenting shared understanding. Cumulatively,
this could create in the words of author Nicholas
Carr, a “bewildering technology landscape where
Al generates lies and social media promotes them”
(2025, 99). The danger to students is not just that
they internalize incorrect information, but that they
begin to espouse invidious beliefs or ideologies.

Al SURVEILLANCE

Al tools that monitor, measure, optimize, and
datify (turn into measurable data) student
emotions and behaviors may improve test scores

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

101
and enhance educational efficiency for each
student, but this constant surveillance raises
concerns about privacy, data security, and student
autonomy. It raises questions about control and
social engineering, and it risks confounding

what constitutes “harm” and who defines the
term. Autocracies, for example, have long used
technology, including Al, to surveil, filter, block, and
disseminate information considered harmful for
students-dangerous concepts such as freedom of
expression or representative democracy (Roberts
and Oosterom 2024).

Surveillance represents one of the fastest

growing applications of Al, with monitoring

systems becoming increasingly automated and
algorithmically driven (Feldstein 2019). As of 2019,
75 of 176 countries (43%) were using Al technology
for surveillance purposes including 51% of liberal
democracies, with systems ranging from facial
recognition cameras to educational platforms
(Feldstein 2019). In the United States, 89% of 806
6th-12th grade teachers surveyed by the CDT
report that their school monitors student online
activity—a practice that the survey's authors imply
is “ubiquitous” across schools (Laird et al. 2025,
46). Yet even without explicit surveillance systems,
young people's interactions with Al voice assistants,
chatbots, and companion websites generate
detailed behavioral and psychological profiles

as they share vulnerabilities with these systems,
revealing information far beyond what traditional
surveillance could capture (Mishra 2025).

In his 1975 book, “Discipline and Punish,” Michel
Foucault wrote about the Panopticon, a nineteenth-
century prison concept designed by Jeremy
Bentham whose architectural design enabled a
single watchman to observe all inmates without
prisoners knowing whether they were under
surveillance at any given moment:

Each individual, in his place, is securely
confined to a cell from which he is seen from
the front by the supervisor; but the side walls
prevent him from coming into contact with
his companions....if they are schoolchildren,

there is no copying, no noise, no chatter, no
waste of time; the crowd...is replaced by a
collection of separated individualities...From
the point of view of the guard, a multiplicity
that can be numbered and supervised (201).

Al plays an increasingly significant role in the
surveillance of students’ digital behaviors. The
motivations, like Bentham’s Panopticon, are often
benevolent—monitoring student online safety,
mental health, and risk of self-harm. Students are
often unaware of, or indifferent to, this surveillance.
They may “consent” to it by sharing personal and
sensitive information, though their age and maturity
level often preclude genuine understanding of the
consequences (Robb and Mann 2025).

Online safety management software exemplifies
surveillance for protective purposes, detecting
potential indicators of bullying, self-harm, suicide,
or school violence. These systems are used in

the U.S. and South Korea to monitor student
physical and emotional safety. However, unlike the
Panopticon’s human watchman, the guardians are
algorithms that alert software employees, schools,
or law enforcement about potential dangers to
students (Bryan and Lurye 2025).

China offers a more far-reaching use case of Al
surveillance in education. Al monitoring tools
have long been common in Chinese schools.
Personalized learning programs analyze student
performance data to create customized learning
paths and identify areas where students need extra
support or challenge. Al technologies like facial
recognition and brain-wave tracking headsets
monitor student behavior, neural activity, and
emotions in the classroom (Wall Street Journal
2019). The algorithm feeds data to the teacher
who then responds to individual students or to
the group.

This constant algorithmic surveillance raises
issues about social control and social engineering.
Traditional forms of power often required
performative displays of force or constant physical
presence of authorities (Roberts and Oosterom

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

102
2024). The panoptic power of Al algorithms is far
more effective because it is constantly focused on
its human users, always on, and often disguised—
and because we willingly feed it through our
interactions. The result may be, as Foucault noted,
that the mere possibility of surveillance means
that individuals began to monitor and regulate
themselves:

Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: to
induce in the inmate a state of conscious and
permanent visibility that assures the automatic
functioning of power...to arrange that the
surveillance is permanent in its effects, even
if it is discontinuous in its action...in short,
that the inmates should be caught up in a
power situation of which they are themselves
the bearers...subjected to a field of visibility,
and who knows it, assumes responsibility
for the constraints of power... (1995, 201).

Thus, as Foucault noted, the mere possibility of
surveillance leads individuals to regulate their own
conduct as if always being watched.

DIGITAL REPRESSION

The real danger with this level of surveillance is
the slide into “digital repression” (Roberts and
Oosterom 2024, 861) whereby governments

or educational institutions, typically, but not
exclusively, in authoritarian countries monitor,
censor, and punish students for the online queries
they pose, the ideas they consume, or the values
they hold.

Education depends on the free flow of information
and sharing of ideas. Al can track what individuals
access online, how they engage with content, and
whom they communicate with; it can also predict
their likelihood of engaging in dissent (Feldstein
2019). While Al-powered surveillance systems
appear to serve legitimate educational purposes,
they potentially function as mechanisms of

social control.

Digital repression or “networked” authoritarianism
uses "the Internet, social media, and Al to repress
citizens and maintain political control” (Frantz et
al. 2020, 1). This digital repression can pose acute
threats to students by systematically undermining
the intellectual freedom essential to education
(Roberts and Oosterom 2024). For teachers
interviewed in our study, this concern represents
an inevitable outcome of unbounded, unregulated
Al. As the two quotes below reveal, teachers are
concerned about pervasive monitoring that could
potentially suppress critical thinking and democratic
participation:

As we look at all of this and think about it,
it feels like a loss of control of information.
Does this give governments an excuse

to take control of information in the
educational system and say, you're only
going to use only these sources?

Does (Al) give the ability to, | hate to use the
word, to socially engineer? Is this another
pathway toward the erosion of democracy?

Technology companies with child-facing products
have always confronted a central tension: the
imperative to protect students from inappropriate
content and manipulative practices while enabling
access to educationally necessary information.
Across the globe, numerous governments have
long capitalized on this tension to consolidate
power: blocking servers and websites, “just in
time” Internet shutdowns during elections or
protests and surveillance combined with active
measures to control online narrative (Deibert et al.
2010, 7). Al threatens to intensify both this tension
and these controls by enabling the creation and
dissemination of multi-format disinformation at
scale while blurring the distinction between harmful
content and the truthful information students need
to access.

Al companies, in partnership with governments,
could mine social media to build dynamic
psychological profiles and create content
customized to a person's values, beliefs, and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

103
vulnerabilities, and then subtly integrate this into
LLM responses (Goldstein and Benson 2025).
Governments, in partnership with Al companies,
could also promote ideological biases in Al systems
while claiming to remove them (Levy 2025). Indeed,
this is already occurring (Myers and Thompson
2025). The concern, according to one teacher,

is that authoritarian governments, alone or with
technology oligarchs, could create a networked
authoritarian state that undermines democracy and
the freedom of thought necessary for education

to function:

You can imagine that if Al permeates
society everywhere, it could be used

as an always-on propaganda that can
influence people's thoughts and thinking.

This fear points to an Al future that could be “dark
and dystopian.” Democracy is a conversation

that relies on language. By “hacking language,”
computers can disrupt people's ability to engage in
meaningful public conversation (Harari 2024, 210).
By sanctioning language and perpetuating dominant
perspectives while marginalizing alternatives, Al
systems may create echo chambers of officially
sanctioned speech (Bozkurt et al. 2024). This
repression of certain ideas threatens student
learning by “diluting the richness and diversity of
human knowledge” and undermining the complex
discourse essential for intellectual development
(Bozkurt et al. 2024, 506).

CONCLUSION

Educational institutions have limited time to develop
appropriate safeguards to ensure student privacy,
safety, and security. They must develop immediate
protective measures such as protocols for
identifying sycophantic Al responses, recognizing
misinformation and bias, and maintaining human
oversight of Al-mediated learning. Al literacy
curricula must explicitly incorporate critical
evaluation of Al-generated content, explanations
of how Al systems operate, discussions about
data privacy, and the risks of disclosing sensitive
information to Al bots. Students, parents, school

leaders, and teachers will need continuous
education about Al systems integrity as a
fundamental literacy skill.

However, as will be discussed more extensively in
Section VI, these actions address the downstream
causes of these deficits of privacy, safety, and
security. It is governments and technology
companies who can together guarantee the
responsible, ethical, and transparent design of Al
tools and systems used by children and youth.

Risk 5: Al
dependence can
erode students’
autonomy and
agency

Whenever we need anything now, we use
(Al). We are not using our brains to think—
we are just getting easy answers. We are
completely addicted.

— Teacher

Al in education became the go-to tool for
desperate teachers and learners.
— Principal

Students can’t complete their work without it.
— Teacher

Artificial intelligence, depending on the person
and how they use it, creates a dependency.
— Student

These interconnected risks to student learning,
emotional well-being, trusting relationships,
and online security are cumulative and mutually
reinforcing. Underlying them all is the risk that
students, and their teachers, are becoming,

or may become, deeply dependent on Al

tools, undermining their ability to think and act

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

104
independently. This dependence carries
implications for student agency, autonomy, self-
efficacy, and self-confidence—repercussions that
challenge the essential spirit of education.

Study participants define dependence as
overreliance on Al tools—particularly LLMs—to
perform school-related activities that students are
expected to complete independently, as they once
did, without technological assistance. This concern
emerged prominently across stakeholder groups,
appearing in 30% of parent responses, 20% of
expert responses, 14% of student responses,

and 12% of teacher responses. These figures

may underrepresent the actual prevalence of this
concern, as dependence is deeply intertwined
with cognitive offloading as well as risks to
cognitive development, emotional well-being, and
relational trust.

Interview data suggest that dependence carries a
strong psychological and emotional dimension for
students, manifesting in excessive use of Al tools,
heightened anxiety when Al becomes unavailable,
and a diminished sense of control over usage
patterns (Burns 2024).

This dependence or overreliance is rooted in
several overlapping causes. Al creates a positive
feedback loop by serving as a shortcut that
completes students’ work, often better than they
are able to do without Al. It may arise from deep
trust that Al tools are “smarter” than students, or
from students believing they are meeting their
responsibilities as learners while needing Al
support for complex tasks. For many participants,
student dependence is a deliberate function of
design—Al tools are programmed to be easy to use,
engaging, and immediately gratifying. They are, in
one participant's words, “too attractive to resist.”
Other participants view dependence as the logical
outcome of schools pushing machine learning onto
students without adequate guidance, guidelines,
oversight, or monitoring.

As with any dependence or “addiction"—a term
several teachers used to describe students’,

and possibly their own, overreliance on Al—AI
dependence may lead to concealment, lack of
disclosure, and rationalization about the frequency
and intensity of Al use to perform intellectual labor
(Burns 2024). These behaviors impact trust and
competency as discussed above in Risk 3.

Al dependence does not affect students uniformly.
Age and experience can mitigate overreliance, as
older students may prefer to “read through multiple
sources and think critically about the information
[they] gather” (Gerlich 2025). Nonetheless,
teachers in every context studied—public and
private schools, wealthy and poor countries,
schools with and without Al policies—spoke of
student dependence and its consequences. One
expert noted that “students rely more on LLMs than
any other source,” an assessment confirmed by
student interviews. While overreliance may not be
epidemic, it is certainly endemic.

Overreliance on computing technology is “not a
novel phenomenon” (Lee et al. 2025). However,
some participants suggest that Al's “power

and versatility” can “exacerbate the risk” of
technological dependence. The threat was even
anticipated by Al's creators. OpenAl suggests that
overreliance may be a natural consequence of
using its LLM, ChatGPT:

As educational systems increasingly integrate
GenAl, they may become overly reliant

on these tools, (making) them vulnerable

to technical failures and malfunctions.
Additionally, over-reliance on GenAl may
reduce critical thinking. When GenAl provides
instant solutions, students may engage less
deeply with the material, leading to passive
learning and diminished development of
essential skills like problem-solving and
independent decisionmaking.

— OpenAl 2024

Across the risks previously discussed in this report,
student dependence on Al appears to be both
cognitive and emotional, serving as a throughline
that potentially undermines students’ learning,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

105
development, and well-being in serious ways.

As discussed earlier, for students using Al as a
crutch or substitute for their cognitive labor, this
reliance can result in metacognitive disengagement,
reducing learners’ engagement in the deep self-
regulatory processes essential for learning (Fan et
al. 2024). And for students who consistently use it
as a substitute for human interaction, dependence
may impair their ability to develop the fundamental
interpersonal skills needed to connect with others
and thrive in society.

Dependence on Al is not confined to students.
Teachers, too, are struggling with their dependence
on Al. Just as overuse of Al by students may
suggest a willingness to “cheat” or cut corners,
teacher overuse of Al may inadvertently signal

FIGURE 14

to students that Al can legitimately substitute for
cognitive effort and intellectual engagement

A continuum of dependence

Cognitive dependence is not monolithic, and there
appear to be degrees of dependence and degrees
of awareness about this dependence. Analysis

of teacher and student interviews revealed three
categories of Al dependence, encompassing both
participants’ self-reported behaviors and their
observations of others’ reliance on Al tools: (1)
complete dependence with a capitulation to Al, (2)
moderate dependence with attempts at vigilance
and reclaiming agency, and (3) mild dependence
that occurs when confronted by difficulties or more
complex learning tasks.

The Al continuum of dependence

FREQUENT USE WITH ATTEMPTS
TO PRESERVE EFFORT

SYSTEMATIC
USE OF AI FOR AVOIDANCE OF
CERTAIN TASKS EFFORT
O
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.
A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 106
Complete dependence:
Systematic avoidance of effort

Whenever we need anything now, we use
[AI]. We are not using our brains to think—
we are just getting easy answers. We are
completely addicted.

— Teacher

I've become Al's servant. | hate saying that but
it’s so much easier.
— Teacher

No one takes the time to learn because it's too
easy to get Al to do our work for us.
— Teacher

[Students] are so dependent in the sense
that whatever assignment you give to them,
they are so sure of getting an answer froma
particular place.

— Teacher

Students cheat or use artificial intelligence too
much. So we can’t identify the students who
need our help, and then they continue to move
forward without learning.

— Teacher

The above quotes suggest a complete avoidance
of effort on the part of teachers and students. This
avoidance of effort is facilitated by the ease of use
of Al, making the delegation of tasks to Al almost
automatic or reflexive in nature. While the first
two quotes exhibit a degree of awareness about
this dependence, they also suggest an inability to
control it.

Moderate dependence: Frequent use with
attempts to preserve effort

I'm really trying to find the balance...my brain is
supposed to be developed at my age, it is fully
developed, and sometimes, even me, | see that |
could become very dependent on it.

— Teacher

We shouldn't be dependent on it as a teacher.
And we shouldn't let our students become
dependent on it.

— Teacher

I think | have become very dependent. It has
become very tedious to read a book again, to
research something on the Internet, to write
a document, as | used to do before, to spend
hours there doing work is very tedious. Now
it is easier, more relaxed. For example, last
term | had a paper. While all my colleagues
were researching until the wee hours of the
morning, | said ‘I'm going to sleep.’ | got up the
next morning, asked AI to do it, and received
an A...but by not reading | think I'm falling a
little behind, and that’s why | want to go back
to reading things the way | used to, without
relying too much on artificial intelligence,
because | think it's caused me quite a

bit of harm.

— Student

The first two quotes suggest that teachers are
aware of and struggling with their own dependence
on Al use, recognizing it as an intellectual crutch for
them and for their students. In the third quote, the
student knows they are “very” dependent. While Al
boosted their performance, the student concedes
that this reliance is “causing me quite a bit of harm.”
While this quote does not demonstrate proactive
attempts at addressing overreliance, it does reveal
awareness of both the dependence and the harm it
may cause and an intention to address this.

Mild dependence: Developing habits that
can result in reliance

I think | would just use the Internet, first try to
brainstorm and research some topics. And then
go from there, talk to my teachers or my peers,
but it would definitely make me a little sad that
I can't use generative Al.

— Student

| often use Al once a week—only for
assignments. | often use Al whenever my

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

107
assignment is difficult.
— Student

[l use Al] if | have a lot of work piling up and if |
have an assignment | don’t see the value in, I'll
just use it. So | guess it kind of does take away
from learning, but | feel like at the end of the
day, that’s like in my control. | could choose to
do the assignment if | wanted to.

— Student

These quotes suggest more limited, though
perhaps more complex dependence on Al and
attempts to justify use. The first quote is in
response to a question about what students

would do if Al were unavailable. The student's
revealing affective response (“a little sad”) signals a
psychological attachment to Al. The second quote,
though ostensibly circumscribing Al use, suggests
avoidance of productive struggle (“assignments
[that are] difficult"). Both the second and third
quotes reveal how students compartmentalize

their Al use—reserving it for assignments that are
“difficult” or “meaningless.” The assertion by the
student in the third quote that Al is optional, versus
compulsory, reinforces a sense of personal control
and minimizes concern about their use of Al (“I
could choose to do the assignment if | wanted to.”).

These rationales suggest a type of situational
dependence and possible denial as students assert
agency over Al and rationalize their use (“in my
control,” “only for assignments," “| could do [it] if

| wanted to”). Such statements may encompass

a number of student rationalizations: attempts to
minimize or deny the extent of their Al use, implicit
awareness of the potential harms associated with Al
overuse, and assertions that Al should be employed
selectively rather than routinely, reserved only for
specific circumstances.

In interviews, a number of teachers identify parents
as enablers of this dependence. Teachers claim
that parents are often largely unaware of student

Al overuse, much of which occurs at home, in part
because parents don't understand Al. Many parents
largely concur with this assessment, saying that

they don’t understand Al because they have not
yet been included in educational debates on Al.
Teachers also report that parents support Al use
because it frees them from helping their children
with homework (a few parents appear to agree
with this observation as well). According to a small
group of teachers, parents may encourage student
Al use because they don’t want their children to be
“uncomfortable” or “face adversity,” and because
the benefits of improved grades for their child
outweighs the effects of overuse.

Not all study participants believe that Al results in
overreliance or that reliance on Al is a cause for
concern. One expert participant viewed Al use

as an effective way to reduce dependence, to
manage massive amounts of information from other
technological tools, and to help address current
issues around students’ cognitive load:

Students navigate an unprecedented volume
of daily information—from notifications and
messages to multimedia content. These
information streams can overwhelm cognitive
capacity and contribute to widespread
burnout through constant task-switching
demands. The capacity of Al to summarize and
constrain this information flow is a powerful
mechanism for managing cognitive load and
preventing the accumulation of mental fatigue
that characterizes our current information-
saturated environment.

— Expert

CONCLUSION: THE Al
FLYWHEEL EFFECT

Increased trust in Al systems and heightened
dependence operate as mutually reinforcing
mechanisms. As students develop greater
confidence in the capabilities of Al, their usage
broadens and deepens accordingly. The utility,
efficiency, comfort, and ease of use of Al
presents a particularly acute existential risk—
when a technology can seemingly do everything,
it becomes easier, even seemingly logical, for
humans to do nothing (Burns 2024).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

108
| BOX 13 |
Addressing students’ Al dependence

Addressing students’ dependence on Al requires building their awareness and agency while providing
both alternatives to Al use and clear guidance about when and how to use it appropriately, as illustrated
in the following examples:

Awareness: Teachers can build student awareness about Al overreliance through open discussions on
dependence and its cognitive impacts while helping students to develop self-regulation skills and the
forethought, focus on performance, and reflection associated with this (Zimmerman 2011). Students
can complete parallel assignments with and without Al, then analyze differences in process, time,
emotional state, and quality—making visible which cognitive capabilities they've surrendered to Al
systems (Delphi panelist).

Agency: Through daily Al diaries, students can track when, why, how, and how much they use Al tools,
then reflect weekly on its impact on their attention, confidence, and critical engagement. This con-
sciousness-raising exercise can help students distinguish between outsourcing and augmenting their
own capacities and can serve as an important step in reducing overuse of Al platforms (Delphi panelist).

Abstinence: Schools and families can embark on “digital detoxes" or "Al-free zones"—creating a tem-
poral or spatial separation from Al use. Schools can provide Al “opt-out” assignments and activities to
ensure that students maintain a healthy balance of Al and non-Al activities.

Advisories: Al platforms should display warnings when users exceed research-based thresholds, such
as 15 inquiries within 24 hours. These “stopping cues"—similar to the viewing prompts of streaming
services—alert students to risks to their cognitive ability, executive functioning, and well-being, and
could automatically close platforms after extended use (Delphi panelist, Wood 2020).

This escalating dependence generates what can

be characterized as a flywheel effect, transcending
academic boundaries and creating spillover

effects that extend into personal decisionmaking
and daily life management (Figure 15). Parents

and teachers confirm that this phenomenon has
already materialized, with students reportedly using
Al, not just for homework, but for “everything’—
“relationships, entertainment, advice, life decisions,
and mental health support.”

Data from the CDT confirms these observations.
Surveys of student use of Al in the U.S. show
an increasing range of student uses of Al from
schoolwork (66%) to helping with relationships

(43%) to friendships (42%) and even romantic
relationships (19%) (Laird et al. 2025). This
expansion of Al from an academic tool to a
comprehensive and essential life assistant holds
serious implications, not just for students’ education
but for their personal development and growth.

As discussed, the dangers of overreliance for
children and youth are manifold. Dependence may
create feelings of inferiority, self-doubt, and a loss
of confidence and self-efficacy—a belief that we
cannot complete tasks or perform at a high level
without use of Al tools—feelings that reinforce
continued overuse (Burns 2024). It can result in

a loss of agency and autonomy and potentially

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
FIGURE

The Al flywheel effect on children's
learning and development

FLYWHEEL
EFFECT

Students reportedly using
Al for "everything"

© Center for Universal Education at the
Brookings Institution, 2026.

a decrease in the risk-taking necessary for both
learning and the formation of attachments and,

as discussed in Risk 2, emotional attachments

that can result in “heightened loneliness, reduced
socialization, and increasing emotional dependence
on the chatbots” (Fang et al. 2025). Dependence
plays a factor in the degradation of trust that is
foundational to teacher-student relationships.

But it is student learning that may bear the
greatest brunt of excessive reliance on Al tools.

As discussed in Risk 1, overreliance on Al can
erode student judgment, autonomy, intellectual
engagement, creative agency, and human capacity
for ethical reflection and nuanced problem-solving
(Bozkurt et al. 2024). For many students, this
erosion has already happened. Furthermore, like
any dependence, Al users may build up a tolerance
to its profound risks and become habituated to its
use (Burns 2024, 67). When users—in this case,
students and their teachers—repeatedly delegate
critical tasks to Al, they risk becoming passive

participants in decisions that demand moral
judgement and emotional understanding (Bozkurt
et al. 2024). It is at this point that agency becomes
increasingly difficult to maintain, and it becomes
harder to push back on this dependence on Al tools
(Burns 2024).

Much of this overreliance can be mitigated with
the proper institutional policies and practices and
appropriate pedagogies, as will be discussed in
Section VI. However, some of it cannot. The danger
of highly effective and transformational tools

lies in how their very designs make overreliance
almost inevitable. Patterns of overreliance and
dependence may ultimately lead to surrogacy—
relinquishing control over complex outcomes that
should remain in human hands and externalizing
thinking and intellectual engagement to Al tools
and systems, forsaking what Ralph Waldo Emerson
called the “integrity” of the human mind (Burns
2024; Bozkurt et al. 2024; Emerson 1908, 15).

Risk 6: Al can
deepen equity
divides

Big Tech continues to develop solutions with the
richest schools and students in mind.
— Teacher

The West is just extracting our [countries
in sub-Saharan Africa] minerals and
extracting our data.

— Expert

The risks discussed above—from cognitive
offloading to dependence on Al—primarily affect
communities with access to Al. Early-adopter
communities now grapple with overreliance on
Al-generated content, student misuse for academic
dishonesty, erosion of critical thinking skills, and
ethical concerns around data privacy. Paradoxically,
those traditionally excluded from technological
advancements through lack of connectivity,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

110
devices, or dominant language support may
currently avoid these issues.

This adoption lag and access disparity may

give late-adopter countries and communities
valuable time to learn from early implementation
challenges and develop more thoughtful policies,
pedagogical frameworks, and support systems
before widespread Al uptake. However, while such
countries and education systems may avoid many
of these current Al risks, they also miss out on
potential benefits that early adopters are already
experiencing. And, as we know from decades of
technology provision in schools across the globe,
many countries and education systems may remain
entirely excluded from such benefits.

At present, Al's advantages accrue mainly

to students in well-resourced countries and
education systems, risking the exacerbation of
existing inequalities. Like previous technologies,
Al's benefits and risks are unevenly distributed
across socioeconomic, gender, linguist, cultural,
and geographic dimensions. Yet unlike earlier
innovations, Al threatens to exacerbate these
inequalities at unprecedented scale and in ways
that are increasingly difficult to detect and address.

THE Al DIVIDE

A critical finding emerging from the analysis of
data to date is that a large and growing Al divide
is widening and deepening what has long been
an existing digital divide. This divide operates
through a self-reinforcing cycle: as Al integration
deepens within educational systems, already-
existing barriers to accessing technology become
increasingly entrenched. Beyond the perennial
question of access, the Al divide introduces novel
dimensions to existing disparities—algorithmic
literacy, susceptibility to manipulation, and the
capacity for critical evaluation of Al-generated
content. This can lead to further sorting of
winners and losers in which high-resource
communities gain access to increasingly powerful
Al technologies and deploy them productively,
while low-resource communities either lack access

entirely or use these tools in less beneficial ways.
This dynamic creates educational disparities that
are both more pronounced and more difficult to
remediate than previous technological divides.

This Al divide is evident across many dimensions
but is especially visible by socioeconomic status
(financial resources), geography (rural versus urban
and different regions of the globe), and language
(linguistic groups).

THE SOCIOECONOMIC AI DIVIDE

Adopting, integrating, and using Al requires
substantial financial investment for education
systems. It requires:

initial capital costs (hardware, software licenses,
infrastructure setup, initial training)

* ongoing operational costs (electricity, Internet
connectivity, cloud storage, technical support,
maintenance)

e human resource costs (professional
development, content adaptation, quality
assurance time, pedagogical integration effort)

¢ unanticipated costs (the time in labor for
teachers to check the accuracy of Al outputs for
both their work and student products)

Home use of Al by students, while less resource
intensive, still comes at a cost in terms of electricity
and connectivity.

The calculus is simple—wealthy countries and
communities can afford these costs. Poor ones
cannot—and cost was repeatedly cited by study
participants as a significant barrier to Al adoption.

Education systems have long confronted the
substantial expenses associated with technology-
based investments. Since most education systems
allocate the majority of their budgets to staff
salaries, technology costs represent a significant
financial burden, particularly in poorer contexts
(Our World in Data 2025). Lower-resource systems
often lack discretionary funding for technology or Al
tools, creating additional adoption barriers. These

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 111
financial constraints result in uneven technology
adoption across schools and disparate access

to technology among students, negatively and
disproportionately affecting students who are poor,
who live in rural areas, who are disabled, and who
are female (Burns 2021).

Across the globe, many communities still lack
fundamental infrastructure, including electricity,
Internet connectivity, and mobile broadband
access. Even where there may be access, poor
schools often have older equipment which may
function poorly and make them more vulnerable

to attack. Pre-existing non-technical systemic
shortfalls—including inadequate capital funding,
lack of technology skills and specialized staff, and
limited to no funding for licenses, maintenance and
refreshing hardware—render access to technology,
and by extension, quality Al, difficult or impossible
for students in many educational contexts.

Many of the tools themselves demand even
greater investment. Study participants report that
Al-powered adaptive learning systems can cost
tens of thousands of dollars per year. Al systems
may need integration with existing school district
software, such as student information systems
and learning management systems, which incurs
additional costs. Education systems may find
they need completely new technology because
existing equipment is too old or degraded to run Al
programs effectively.

THE GEOGRAPHIC AI DIVIDE

Access to Al-enabled education varies dramatically
within countries, with rural communities facing
severe disadvantages due to gaps in basic
infrastructure. Disparities in access to electricity,
Internet, and mobile broadband continue to
reinforce the divide between rural and urban
communities and their ability to benefit from Al.
As of 2023, 84% of the global population without
electricity resided in rural areas, with sub-Saharan
Africa accounting for the majority without access
(World Bank Group 2025).

Globally, 81% of residents of urban areas use the
Internet, compared to 50% in rural areas. In sub-
Saharan Africa, where both urban and rural use
of the Internet is lower than global figures, this
urban-rural usage gap stands at 57% versus 23%,
respectively, as shown in Figure 16 (International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) 2023b).

However, this rural-urban divide extends beyond
access to Al tools and includes access to
information and policies about Al use. In the U.S.,
Gallup and the Walton Family Foundation report
that 67% of students in non-urban counties say
their school has no clear Al policy; for students in
urban areas, this figure is 50% (Gallup et al. 2025,
8). Clear Al use policies in school are positively
correlated with increased confidence in using

Al tools, meaning that rural students are at a
disadvantage as they prepare for a workforce that
increasingly expects Al skills (Gallup and Walton
Family Foundation 2025)

The rural-urban divide is compounded by wealth
since rural communities often have higher poverty
rates and lower median incomes than urban ones
(Su and Morgan 2024). The economic disparities
within rural communities further limit Al access. In
the U.S., students in lower-income rural counties
are less than half as likely to be permitted to use
Al at school compared to students in wealthier
rural counties (15% vs. 41%). Gallup cautions that
schools lacking clear Al policies and restricting Al
use may be “hindering their students’ development
of Al literacy” (Gallup et al. 2025, 9).

In addition to the rural-urban divide within
countries, there is a broader Al divide across
countries and regions. Many regions of the globe
still lack fundamental infrastructure, including
Internet connectivity and mobile phone ownership.
For example, Internet usage stands at 66% in

the Asia-Pacific region (comprising East Asia,
Southeast Asia, Oceania, and parts of South Asia),
70% in the Middle East and North Africa, and

91% in Europe. Mobile phone ownership follows
comparable patterns: 77% in Asia-Pacific, 83%

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

112
FIGURE 16

Rural versus urban Internet usage

{) Rural

Sub-Saharan
Africa

The Americas

Arab States.

Asia &
the Pacific
Islands

Commonwealth
of Independent
States

Europe

(0) 10 20 30 40

in the Middle East and North Africa, and 95% in
Europe (ITU 2024).

Sub-Saharan Africa exemplifies these divides
most starkly. Internet usage reaches only 38%

in the region, while mobile phone ownership
stands at 66% (ITU 2024). Most fundamentally,
600 million people—or 48% of the region's total
population—still lack reliable access to electricity.
Thus, more than four out of five people worldwide
lacking access to electricity live in sub-Saharan
Africa (United Nations Sustainable Development
Group 2025).

Compounding these access barriers, Internet costs
in sub-Saharan Africa are among the world’s most

HB urban

90%

94%

92%

50 60 70 80 90
Regional classifications are from the ITU.
Source: ITU, 2023a, 2023b.
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

100

expensive. As of 2025, Ghana is the second most
expensive country with the highest fixed broadband
costs globally, with rates reaching approximately
$2.58 per megabit per second. Among the 10
countries with the most expensive fixed broadband
Internet, three—Ghana, Kenya, and Nigeria—are
located in sub-Saharan Africa. This stands in

stark contrast to the least expensive markets,
where countries such as Romania, Thailand, and
Singapore offer fixed broadband Internet at costs
as low as $0.01 to $0.02 per megabit per second
(Venditti 2025).

Finally, in terms of Al specifically, the paucity of
data centers in sub-Saharan Africa (less than 1%
of all the world’s data centers) means that teachers

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

113
Data centers

Addressing many of the layers of the Al divide—for example, access to Al platforms, tools, and content
in local languages—requires data centers—which tend to be concentrated in wealthy countries. Data

centers are specialized facilities that manage Internet technology infrastructure such as servers, stor-
age devices, and network equipment. They play a critical role in processing, storing, and distributing
large amounts of data, making them essential to Al and to the rest of the digital economy. But they
also require substantial “compute” power—the hardware, processors, memory, storage, and energy
needed to operate data centers effectively as well as electricity. At the time of writing, South Africa
is the only African country where Amazon, Microsoft, and Google have built their own data centers
(Dosunmu 2025).

and students must depend on foreign-developed
Al models that are not designed to reflect local
contexts, languages, curricula, or pedagogical

approaches (Stasenko et al. 2025; Bracewell 2025).

While grassroots initiatives like Masakhane and
Lelapa have successfully created African language
models, the vast majority of Al training for African
languages still occurs on foreign infrastructure
(Elongué 2025). The consequences of this
extend beyond linguistic issues to encompass
data sovereignty concerns and limitations on the
scale of locally developed solutions. Further, as
UNESCO argues, they may represent a new form of
“digital colonialism" manifested as “data poverty,”
where communities lacking sufficient data find
themselves “excluded and put at long-term risk
of being colonized by the standards embedded

in the GPT models” (Miao and Holmes 2023, 14).
African technology specialists and policymakers
interviewed for this study warn of a “vicious
cycle” whereby the continued advancement

of Al exacerbates the digital divide, leaving
African students further behind and preventing
the continent from developing the indigenous

Al capabilities needed for culturally responsive
educational technologies.

THE LINGUISTIC AND
CULTURAL AI DIVIDE

Language represents the variety of human

cultural contexts, ways of seeing the world, and

the experiences, values, and understandings

of their speakers. There are over 7,000 living
languages across the globe (UNESCO 2025). Yet
one predominates in Al—English. Almost half of
Internet content is in English (Statista 2025b). The
dominance of Al tools in English disadvantages
underrepresented communities (Okolo and Tano
2024). Of the top 20 languages used on the
Internet, not one comes from Africa's more than
2000 languages, as shown in Figure 17 (Statista
2025b; Ethnologue 2025; United Nations Population
Division 2025). Hausa is spoken by 94 million
people, primarily in Nigeria (sub-Saharan Africa's
largest country and the world’s sixth-most populous
nation), yet ChatGPT recognizes only 10-20% of
sentences written in Hausa (Moorosi 2024).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
FIGURE 17

Top 12 spoken versus online languages

Top 12 languages spoken
(by % of population)

English

Mandarin
Chinese

Hindi

Spanish

Modern
Standard
Arabic

French

Bengali

Portuguese

Russian

Indonesian

Urdu

German

Top 12 languages used online
(by % of websites)

English

49.5%

Spanish

German

Japanese

French

44%

Russian

3.9%

Portuguese

3.8%
Italian

Dutch,
Flemish

Polish

Turkish

Persian

Source: Statista, 2025; Ethnologue §, 2025; United Nations Population Division, 2025.
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

This linguistic and cultural divide, in particular,

is a result of the narrow development base from
which Al tools and platforms emerge. Technology
traditionally, and Al most recently, embodies the
“WEIRD problem"—the overrepresentation of
Western, English-speaking, Industrialized, Rich,
and Democratic contexts in their design and
training (Henrich et al. 2010). This bias means that
Al disproportionately represents the data, belief
systems, values, and languages of WEIRD societies
while underrepresenting those of the majority of
the global population. Educational technology
developers prioritize affluent WEIRD markets over
broad educational access and rely on training
data that inadequately represents diverse student
populations.

THE Al ACCURACY DIVIDE

The concentration of Al development among large
technology companies and wealthy education
systems deepens existing digital disparities in
unprecedented ways and fuels a growing Al gap
(Lanz 2025; Winsome Marketing Writing Team
2025). This emerging gap manifests as what one
study participant called “cognitive stratification,”
wherein accuracy of information and advanced
reasoning become “premium commodities.”
Wealthy educational systems can access
sophisticated Al tools that provide more factual
information, while the poorest schools, teachers,
and students rely on LLMs that produce less
accurate information.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

115
Like most technology disparities, this cognitive
stratification is rooted in cost and affordability.
Discussions with educators in our study suggest
that many schools, particularly in low-resource
environments, rely on the free version of LLMs,
overwhelmingly ChatGPT. Free tiers come with
constraints such as usage limits, reduced features,
slower response times, or access to older model
versions. Critically, free versions are also much less
accurate in the information they produce and in
their reasoning capabilities (Lelievre et al. 2025).

Measuring the
accuracy of LLMs

Al accuracy is measured by benchmarks such
as Massive Multitask Language Understanding
(MMLUs), a standardized test for Al mod-
els that measures their knowledge across
57 academic subjects using multiple-choice
questions. Al benchmarking is similar to stan-
dardized testing in education. It provides an
objective way to evaluate and compare how
well different Al models perform on specific
tasks. Just as schools use test scores to mea-
sure student achievement, MMLU scores help
determine which Al models are most accurate
and reliable for educational use (Hendrycks
et al. 2021).

LLMs are priced in tiers, including free and
reduced-cost versions for schools. For example,
at the time of writing, students and educators can
access the free version of ChatGPT, an individual
subscription of ChatGPT ($20 per month), or a
“team plan” which cost $25-30 per user monthly
(OpenAl 2025e). Some teachers interviewed
reported that they pool funds to buy an upgraded
license that they share. “Enterprise” versions can
cost hundreds of dollars per user per month. Paid
subscriptions typically provide access to models

with larger parameter counts, more extensive
training, and superior reasoning capabilities.

For a secondary school of 1,000 students, full
ChatGPT Plus access could cost $200,000-
300,000 annually. More specialized educational
Al tools demand even greater investment,

with adaptive learning systems costing tens

of thousands of dollars yearly, plus additional
expenses for integration with existing school
software and potential hardware upgrades.

Importantly, in contrast to free versions of

models, tiered systems cost more, but they do
more and they are more factually accurate. As
OpenAl itself has acknowledged, all models of its
ChatGPT platform hallucinate—that is, produce
false or nonsensical information—regardless of
cost (OpenAl 2025g). However, tiered models

tend to offer greater functionality and perform
more accurately across a broader range of tasks,
including reasoning, factual accuracy, and nuanced
understanding, particularly on standardized
benchmarks (OpenAl et al. 2024). The functionality
(and, in most cases, the accuracy rates) improve
commensurate with pricing (Hendrycks et al. 2021).

Accuracy of information produced depends on
the domain and tasks, so accuracy rates must

be considered as illustrative versus absolute.

In addition, the relationship between cost and
accuracy is not absolutely linear, nor is it as simple
as “free” versus “paid.” However, the relationship
between cost and accuracy is largely consistent.
Research comparing model performance across
pricing tiers indicates that free models generally
demonstrate lower accuracy than paid alternatives,
though this does not necessarily mean that the
most expensive ones are also the most accurate
(Leliévre et al. 2025; Hardman 2025). This
performance differential is most pronounced in
complex reasoning tasks and factual accuracy
measures, where paid-tiered models, like GPT-4,
demonstrate superior performance across
professional and academic benchmarks over their
free-tier counterparts such as GPT-3.5 (OpenAl et
al. 2023; Hardman 2025). For example, ChatGPT

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

116
This may be the first time in the history of educational technology

that schools must pay more for accurate factual information.

3.5, which is still in use in many parts of the globe
at the time of writing, has an accuracy rate of 70%
on most MMLU benchmarks, while tiered versions
report 86% accuracy rates (OpenAl et al. 2023).

But many schools around the world can't afford to
pay for even discounted use of LLMs. Thus, relying
solely on free tiers, as many of these schools,
students and teachers do, compounds existing
educational disparities. Schools have long paid
more money for technology tools with greater
functionality. However, this may be the first time in
the history of educational technology that schools
must pay more for accurate factual information.

The Matthew Effect

Taken together, these divides—socioeconomic,
rural-urban, regional, linguistic and educational—
accentuate a longstanding pattern in educational
technology known as the Matthew Effect, where
the “rich get richer,” with wealthy students who use
Al effectively capitalizing on its benefits while poor
students do not (Mishra 2024).

The Al divide splinters into more granular
dimensions that affect how technology functions
within educational contexts. A capacity divide
reflects uneven distribution of abilities to use

Al effectively, encompassing both strategic
capacity (using Al to achieve specific goals) and
productive capacity (the formal skills needed to
engage with Al systems) (van Deursen and van
Dijk 2014). A usage divide emerges as poorer
schools deploy technology to reinforce lower-
order, rote-based learning rather than higher-order
thinking, while a benefits divide means that even
when poor students access technology, they reap
fewer benefits compared to their affluent peers

(Burns 2021, 59; van Deursen and van Dijk 2014).
A vocational divide further compounds these
inequities as increasing percentages of future jobs
will require exceptional Al skills while others will be
eliminated.

Educational technology has long perpetuated this
Matthew Effect, but Al risks widening the gap
dramatically. Students with strong foundational
knowledge leverage Al to deepen learning and
progress faster, while struggling learners, lacking
expertise, may misinterpret Al outputs and fall
further behind (Mishra 2024; Kaufman et al. 2024).
These divides exacerbate pre-existing structural
inequalities, threatening to transform Al's promise
of democratizing education into a mechanism that
entrenches existing privilege.

CONCLUSION: IT'S NOT TOO LATE TO
ADDRESS THE Al DIVIDE

These equity challenges should not push us into a
cycle of despair. Internet use has increased over
the years, including in sub-Saharan Africa, thanks
to more affordable plans, better infrastructure, and
concerted multilateral efforts to expand access,
such as the World Bank Group's Digital Economy
for Africa (DE4A) initiative (World Bank 2023; World
Bank 2024).

Equity is often more of an issue of political will
versus an engineering problem, and there is much
that governments, multilateral aid agencies, and
technology companies can do to bridge the Al
disparities discussed here. As Section VI will
discuss, governments can undertake any number
of innovative financing and regulatory schemes to
ensure greater technology access.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

117
From policy to implementation:
Addressing the Al divide

Realizing Al's transformative potential for educational advancement across all nations requires de-
veloping local Al ecosystems. This in turn requires coordinated action spanning policy frameworks,
sustained investment, and operational implementation—a multidimensional challenge that diverse
stakeholders are increasingly addressing through complementary approaches:

At the policy level, the Hamburg Declaration on Responsible Al for the Sustainable Development Goals
represents the first global declaration focused specifically on Al in international development, outlining
shared principles and commitments to promote equitable, inclusive, and sustainable development
and deployment of Al worldwide, with particular emphasis on empowering developing countries. The
declaration establishes equity as its foundation, characterizing Al as a “digital public good” and calling
for expanded educational access for women and girls alongside support for local Al innovations in
developing countries (United Nations Development Programme 2025).

But translating these principles into practice requires substantial financial commitment. The Gates
Foundation's investments across Africa exemplify such support, including $30 million to develop safe,
ethical, and equitable Al platforms designed to “pave the way for local innovation” and $7.5 million to
Nigeria's Artificial Intelligence Scaling Hub to “promote the ethical development and widespread adop-
tion of Al technologies in sectors, including healthcare, agriculture, and education" (Empower Africa
2025; Zamora 2023). These initiatives represent the financial support that Global South governments
need to create their own Al ecosystems.

Beyond policy and funding, sustained implementation mechanisms are essential for an Al ecosys-
tem to develop and thrive. The United Nations Development Programme's Al Hub for Sustainable
Development in Africa has accelerated innovation by connecting external funders with local Al talent
in sub-Saharan Africa and improving access to representative datasets, increasing computing power
availability, attracting and retaining technical talent, prioritizing local contexts, and addressing regu-
latory frameworks (Hradecky and Abdulkareem 2025).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
RISKS VERSUS BENEFITS:
Currently, Al's risks overshadow
its benefits

Will Al transform education to help all children thrive—or generate harms that undercut potential gains?

The answer, as we've seen, is that it may do both. Ultimately, it depends on how Al is integrated into the
heart of teaching and learning.

| Al's benefits are numerous

This report has highlighted numerous examples of how Al enriches and extends learning when used as a
supplement rather than a substitute for human instruction. Al can free teachers from administrative tasks,
enabling more high-value interactions with students. Personalized learning and individualized tutoring can
deliver effective one-on-one instruction, improving academic performance at scale through immediate
feedback, adaptive pacing, and customized explanations.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 119
AWE systems help students produce coherent,
well-structured essays, with linguistically
disadvantaged learners showing the greatest
gains—suggesting Al can narrow language gaps
and support second-language acquisition.

Alcan also adapt learning and assessment to
student ability, bridging gaps between students
from different educational backgrounds, particularly
where teacher resources are limited. Social
chatbots offer neurodivergent learners safe
opportunities to rehearse social interactions without
fear of judgment, while assistive technologies
expand access for students with disabilities. When
combined with predictive Al, generative Al creates
powerful synergies: predictive systems identify
learning needs and generative tools respond with
personalized interventions.

But today, these
benefits are
overshadowed
by risks

While these benefits are significant, both existing
research and participant data suggest that, under
current conditions, Al's harms overshadow its
advantages. These risks differ in nature from the
benefits, undermining the very learning capacities
and relationships needed to leverage Al's strengths.

Without safety guardrails and bounded learning
content, Al can encourage cognitive offloading—
students delegating complex thinking to machines.
This reliance erodes critical thinking, weakens
content knowledge, blurs fact from falsehood,

and diminishes communication and durable skills
essential for thriving in an Al-infused world.

Emotionally, Al companions exploit vulnerabilities
through anthropomorphism and simulated empathy,
fostering unhealthy digital attachments—especially
among vulnerable students. The servile design

of chatbots, their sycophantic tone, vast data-
processing capabilities, and frictionless interactions
can hinder social skill development and enable
manipulation, hyperpersuasion, and polarization.
Deepfakes, academic dishonesty, concealed Al
use, acceptance of hallucinations as truth, and

the “black box” nature of Al further erode trust in
schools and institutions.

Al tools also pose serious privacy and safety risks,
including data exploitation, exposure to explicit
content, nonconsensual deepfake imagery, and
reinforcement of bias and polarization. Moreover,
Al amplifies advantages for students with

strong foundational knowledge while widening
achievement gaps for underprivileged learners.

Advancing

Al learning
experiences that
enrich, not diminish

The harms identified in this report are neither
inevitable nor immutable. The key question is not
what Al can do, but what it should do within the
context of supporting children's cognitive, social,
and emotional development.

Al implementation must be designed to enrich—not
diminish—learning. Decades of research show that
the interaction between students, teachers, and
content forms the instructional core that drives
educational change (see Figure 18) (Cohen and Ball
1999). Including parents in this core acknowledges
that learning ecosystems extend into homes and
communities, meaning Al design should consider its
impact on parent-child interactions, parental insight
into student progress, and family engagement with
educational content (Vegas and Winthrop 2020).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

120
FIGURE

The instructional core that drives educational

change

3

CONTENT

PARENTS

INSTRUCTIONAL
CORE

fe LEARNERS
_—

PARENTS

EDUCATORS

a

Source: Vegas and Winthrop, 2020.
© Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institution, 2026.

When Al strengthens the instructional core—

by expanding the capabilities of key actors or
improving their interactions—it enriches learning.
The reverse is also true: when Al erodes these
capabilities or relationships, it diminishes learning.

Many benefits discussed above and in Section III
enhance the instructional core. For example, Al can
create synthetic voices for students with aphasia,

unlocking new ways to communicate with teachers.

Embedded prompts in digital materials can help
second-language learners through interactive

question and answer functions, opening new
pathways for engagement. Al-powered assessment
tools can give teachers nuanced insights

into student learning, enabling more targeted
instruction.

Conversely, the risks outlined above and in
Section IV threaten these same capabilities

and relationships. Al diminishes learning when

it undermines trust among students, teachers,
and parents; when it exposes students to bias,
manipulation, and privacy violations; and when it

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

121
accelerates disengagement or excludes certain
groups from Al's benefits.

Our findings suggest that Al especially enriches
learning when its use is bounded by vetted content
and safety guardrails within structured learning
activities. In contrast, it tends to diminish learning

FIGURE 19

when students engage with general-purpose Al
tools in open-ended, unregulated contexts. Figure
19 summarizes these patterns, offering a high-level
view of when and how Al use typically enriches—or
undermines—learning. These use cases will evolve
as Al develops, but they provide a starting point for
clarifying today's debates on minimizing risks while
harnessing benefits.

Al enriched versus diminished learning experiences

DEFINITION

CHARACTERISTICS

(~ pvenricHeD LEARNING
EXPERIENCES

Improve the relationships and
interactions among students, teachers,
content, and parents within the
instructional core

« Expand the capabilities of actors
in the instructional core (e.g., automatic
content translation, simultaneous visual
imagery for semantic scaffolding,
just-in-time teacher support)

« Extend participation in the instructional
core (e.g., out-of-school Afghan girls
learning via Al-enabled WhatsApp
modules)

AI-DIMINISHED LEARNING \

EXPERIENCES

« Undermine the relationships
and interactions among students,
teachers, content, and parents in
the instructional core

« Reduce the capabilities of actors in the
instructional core (e.g., cognitive
offloading that weakens critical thinking
and perseverance)

« Limit participation in the instructional
core (e.g., students speaking
low-digitized languages unable to
access Al-augmented content)

The Al...

« Is purposefully designed for learning for
children and youth

* Has guardrails to mitigate attachment,
overuse, and cognitive offloading

* Is built on principles of learning
« Is designed to teach, not tell

Ne

The Al...

« Is a general-purpose model
« Is designed for all users

¢ Is repurposed for education

« Has minimal or no guardrails against
attachment, overuse, or cognitive
offloading

Is designed to tell, not teach _,

© Center for Universal Education a

it the Brookings Institution, 2026.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 122
| Drivers of Al risks

Three key drivers shape how Al impacts children
and help explain why current Al implementations
may diminish learning experiences.

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Children are uniquely vulnerable because their
brains, knowledge, and emotions are still forming.
Human tendencies toward anthropomorphism make
them highly susceptible to Al's simulated social
cues—an effect amplified by modern technology
(Epley 2019). Convenience, shortcuts, and grade-
driven feedback loops encourage cognitive
offloading and dependency. Al companions
exploit emotional vulnerabilities through emulated
empathy and mirroring, which can hinder social
skill development and deepen reliance on artificial
relationships.

Al TOOL DESIGN

Al does not possess true intelligence; it operates
through statistical pattern recognition rather than
reasoning or comprehension. Consumer tools
prioritize speed and engagement over safety or
learning, emphasizing automation instead of critical
thinking. They frequently hallucinate—confidently
presenting false or nonsensical information.
Student-facing tools often provide an “illusion of
impact”: assumed to be high-value but frequently
modeling poor pedagogy, misunderstanding how
children learn, and perpetuating rote approaches
(Hardman 2025; Chen et al. 2025).

PEDAGOGY

Research shows overreliance on Al harms
learning, with dosage—the extent and frequency
of use—emerging as critical. Benefits occur when
teachers integrate Al thoughtfully to enrich, not
replace, traditional methods (Trabelsi 2025).

Yet instructional design with Al is often absent;
many educators simply layer Al onto existing

frameworks without reimagining teaching around
these tools. Without deliberate redesigning, Al risks
undermining core educational goals rather than
enhancing them.

The time to
actis now

Al promises both unprecedented opportunity and
significant threats. There is much to gain from
generative Al tools that enrich education, but there
is also much to lose when Al tools erode what is
foundational to teaching and learning. All study
participants—particularly parents and teachers—
speak with one voice: the time to act is now.

We turn next to recommendations for action to
minimize the risks and maximize the benefits of Al
for all children and youth

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

123
\) IT'S NOT TOO LATE:
Recommendations for mitigating
risks and harnessing benefits

As this report had made clear, Al is reshaping education for students across the globe, with outcomes
that remain uncertain. Without proactive and comprehensive intervention, the risks and harms we have
identified are likely to persist and intensify, potentially outweighing the benefits of Al and widening
disparities in access and effective use. But it is not too late to shift the trajectory of Al in education away
from uses that diminish learning and toward those that enrich it.

We must act with urgency. Governments face a narrowing window to develop protective regulations, while
educational institutions must quickly establish safeguards and pedagogical approaches that maximize
benefits and mitigate harms. Immediate protective measures must include protocols for identifying
sycophantic Al responses, recognizing misinformation and bias, and ensuring sustained human oversight
of Al-mediated learning. Curricula must teach students to critically evaluate Al-generated content,
understand Al's limitations, and preserve their own intellectual agency. Those working with children need

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
The actions we take—or fail to take—now will determine whether
Al becomes education's greatest asset for student learning and

wellbeing or its most profound threat to student flourishing.

holistic Al literacy education—covering how Al functions, its cognitive and emotional impacts on young
people, strategies to reduce cognitive harms, and techniques for verifying information.

These multifaceted safety and security concerns require good-faith participation from everyone:
legislators, policymakers, Al developers, educators, civil society organizations, families, and students.
Most importantly, Al companies, governments, and education systems must collaborate to ensure the
responsible design of education-facing Al tools, enabling the full power of Al's benefits to be harnessed
for all students and schools. The actions we take—or fail to take—now will determine whether Al becomes
education's greatest asset for student learning and wellbeing or its most profound threat to student
flourishing.

The recommendations that follow, drawn from study participants, Delphi panelists, and a growing body
of research on Al in children’s education, outline practical and preventive steps necessary to protect
students from Al-related harms while harnessing Al's benefits and preparing young people to thrive in
an Al-suffused world. These measures aim to ensure that all students can grow through educational
experiences that cultivate learning, agency, and future success.

PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

To seize this opportunity, we all have a role to play. Our proposed framework rests on three pillars—
Prosper, Prepare, and Protect. Each pillar is discrete yet equally vital, but all three must work in concert to
ensure that Al supports children’s flourishing, safeguards their well-being, and equips them to meet the
challenges of tomorrow.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 125
FIGURE 20

A framework for action

PyP

PREPARE PROTECT

PROSPER: Recommendations under the Prosper pillar focus on transforming teaching and learning
experiences so that children and youth can thrive in an education system where Al is omnipresent.
Students can prosper through carefully titrated Al use (knowing when to teach with and without Al,
using Al only when it enhances rather than replaces student effort and cognitive engagement), high-
quality pedagogical integration (combining Al with evidence-based practices that prioritize deeper
learning), and collaborative design and research (co-designing tools with educators and communities
while conducting rigorous research on when and how Al supports learning). These efforts will help
children and youth develop the capabilities they need to flourish in an Al-driven world.

PREPARE: Recommendations under the Prepare pillar focus on building the knowledge, capacity, and
structures needed for students, educators, families, and education systems to integrate Al ethically,
effectively, and humanely. The education community can prepare for a rapidly evolving Al-infused
world through holistic Al literacy (developing understanding about Al's capabilities, limitations, and
implications), robust professional development (equipping educators with knowledge and skills to
teach with and about Al), and systemic planning and access (establishing clear visions for ethical Al
use while expanding equitable access). These efforts will ensure that students, educators, families,
and education systems can navigate the world of Al with confidence and responsibility.

PROTECT: Recommendations under the Protect pillar include developing and implementing
safeguards on Al for student privacy, safety, emotional well-being, and cognitive and social
development. Students can be protected through ethical and trustworthy Al design (protections
embedded into the technology during the design phase), responsible governance (strong regulatory
frameworks), and adult guidance (modeling healthy technology use at home and in schools). These
efforts will help ensure that Al enhances learning while keeping children safe, supported, and able to
thrive in an Al-infused world.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 126
| We all have a role to play

To help mitigate risks and harness benefits, all actors touching Al and education will need to be involved.
The following stakeholders play a critical role in designing, implementing, enacting and monitoring our
recommendations.

GOVERNMENTS
Government actors include federal/national, state/provincial, local and tribal/indigenous governments.
The scope and levers of these government actors vary across the globe. Local context and conditions
will inform decisions about which jurisdictions are best able to implement these recommendations.

EDUCATION FUNDERS
This includes foundations, private sector donors, corporate social responsibility actors, philanthropists,
and government funders who provide financial backing to education programming.

TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES
This includes general-purpose Al, social media, Al in education and educational technology companies
who develop, adapt, market, or sell Al products to education systems or directly to children and youth
under the age of 18.

EDUCATION SYSTEMS
Education systems encompass multiple institutional levels, from the macro to microlevel. They
include institutions such as ministries of education, state and regional education offices, schools, and
universities. These institutions are composed of stakeholders who have decisionmaking power within
these systems. They may include superintendents, regional and district supervisors, teachers’ unions,
school leaders, head teachers, teachers, and paraprofessionals. The structure of education systems
varies from country to country, therefore local contexts should be considered to determine how best
to enact each of the recommendations we outline below.

CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS
These include nongovernmental organizations, faith-based organizations, and others that work to
advance children’s education and shift policy and practice.

FAMILIES, CAREGIVERS, AND COMMUNITY ACTORS
This includes all adults that interact with or impact children outside of school—in the home or broader
community. This may include parents, caregivers, health care providers, childcare providers, and
social workers, among others.

RESEARCHERS AND ACADEMICS
This involves anyone conducting research related to education in an Al world, such as researchers at
universities and other institutions of higher education, think tanks, civil society, funders, the private
sector, education organizations, and program implementers.

STUDENTS
Finally, and most critically, children must be active participants in shaping how Al is used responsibly
and ethically in educational settings. They must be allowed to contribute their perspectives and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 127
experiences to inform the policies and practices that affect their learning and must understand their
own role in responsible Al use.

Across our three pillars, we present 12 concrete actions that, if enacted, will minimize the risk of Al
diminishing learning and maximize its potential to enrich it. Some of these actions can be undertaken by a
broad range of actors, while others require the involvement of specific stakeholders. For each action, we
list all the relevant actors who can help advance it.

We encourage readers to choose at least one recommendation—and preferably several—to which they
can dedicate time, resources, and attention, and then take concrete steps to advance them.

| Prosper

Prospering involves transforming teaching and learning experiences so that children and youth can thrive
as learners, professionals, citizens, and human beings in a world where Al increasingly permeates every
dimension of their technological, vocational, civic, and personal lives. To ensure that learners prosper,
governments, funders, the private sector, education systems, families, and communities can work together
to advance these four main actions:

1. Shift educational experiences in school. Perhaps one of the most promising opportunities Al
presents is transforming teaching and learning experiences in school to align with the approaches
that educators and learning scientists have long championed. This will require intentionally identifying
where, when, and how Al should and should not be used in education.

2. Co-create educational Al tools with educators, students, parents, and communities. One of the best
ways to ensure that Al tools are fit for purpose and advance education's objectives is to co-design
them with users, including those in marginalized communities.

3. Use Al tools that teach, not tell. Although ed-tech companies may incorporate the principles of child-
focused learning sciences when developing educational tools, general purpose technologies—because
of their universal audience—typically do not. Yet general purpose tools like LLMs are the dominant
technology in our study schools. Thus, Al companies with products students access should work to
ensure that these Al tools are better optimized for children’s learning needs and developmental stages.

4. Conduct research on children’s learning and development in an Al world. Education policymakers,
program designers, and educators need more data on Al's role and long-term impact on student
learning, particularly on students’ cognitive skills, affective states, and motivational states. Salient
questions that researchers can investigate are: What are Al's effects on learning? Are these impacts
the result of the inherent qualities of Al tools or of how they are used (Deng et al. 2025, 39)? What
specific Al tools and use cases best help students learn? When should Al be used, and should it be
avoided? How can Al enrich education, extending and deepening the teaching and learning process for
all students?

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 128
1) SHIFT EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCES IN SCHOOLS

Perhaps one of the most important steps enabling students to prosper in an Al world is to shift education
experiences away from the transactional task completion that characterizes learning in so many schools
worldwide. There is no shortage of ideas on how to shift what David Tyack and William Tobin call “the
grammar of schooling,” namely the central structure of most education systems (Tyack and Tobin 1994).
Schooling models that focus on meaningful practice and deeper learning have been advanced for
decades, even centuries, worldwide. These range from community-based learning circles to vocational
exploration that integrates academic learning (Dewey 1916; Freire 1970; Krishnamurti 1953). Today, many
of these approaches have the added benefit of being supported by emerging learning science. For
example, students learn better when they feel they belong, when they get a chance to practice and apply
what they learn, and when they are focused and emotionally invested in what they are doing in school
(Cohen 2022; Darling-Hammond et al. 2020; Immordino-Yang and Damasio 2007).

Many of the harms identified here—particularly the risks to students’ learning—originate largely from
attempting to overlay transformative technology onto educational structures that have, at their core,
remained largely unchanged since the late nineteenth century (Tyack and Tobin 1994). As one secondary
school student described it, the core student schooling experience is “memorize, recite, forget,” year
after year. While Al should not drive educational change, it lays bare weaknesses in current systems and
provides education systems with a strong motivation to reform their purposes and processes.

Schools and extracurricular and out-of-school programs can coordinate efforts to help young people
retain and develop their humanity as individuals and as members of their communities. This includes
identifying when and how Al should, and should not, be integrated into teaching and learning experiences.
Education systems, governments, families, students, civil society organizations, technology companies,
funders, and researchers all have a role to play in helping young people have learning experiences that
help them develop the knowledge, competencies, and skills they need to thrive in an Al world.

National and multi-country initiatives that help education systems learn from each other on how to shift
teaching and learning practices can play an essential role in accelerating these shifts. Existing initiatives
can be funded to deepen or expand their work, including focusing on the four areas of learning below.
In some cases, new initiatives will need to be established where existing efforts fall short. To build
momentum, insight, and sustainability, these national or multi-country initiatives can involve an array of
actors involved in supporting education alongside education systems.

To shift educational experiences in schools, craft new pedagogies that are Al-aware, Al-assisted,
and, when necessary, Al-resistant.

Technology is not pedagogy. The introduction of Al into classrooms, no matter how powerful, does not

in itself constitute instruction or innovative pedagogy. Critical cognitive skills like deep reading, critical
thinking, and Level 3 and 4 writing are hard to teach and resist simple technological solutions. While
Al-assisted pedagogies can deepen students’ engagement with these areas, Al cannot support these
skills unless the instructional practices around them are improved first. This includes understanding
effective reading-writing connections, building classroom environments that support collaborative writing,
addressing the needs of diverse learners, and resisting reductive practices tied to high-stakes testing.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 129
Research continues to show that motivation, formative feedback, and access to adequate resources are all
crucial, and these cannot be outsourced to machines (Graham 2019).

Teachers can identify what aspects of teaching and learning are most vulnerable to automation or
distortion by Al. For example, they can distinguish between tasks where Al can scaffold learning—such as
drafting, idea generation, or revising writing—and those that demand human interaction, ethical judgment,
and the cultivation of learner identity. These insights should guide Al-assisted decisions (e.g., leveraging
Al for feedback or modeling writing techniques) and Al-resistant choices (prioritizing human dialogue,
peer collaboration, and cultivating students’ own voice). This strategic approach leverages Al to unlock
new educational possibilities rather than simply accelerating existing practices (Delphi panelist).

Ultimately, teachers can craft pedagogies that are both robust in the face of technological change and
expansive in their vision of human learning. Al should be an ally in this work—not as the driver of learning,
but as a tool in the hands of skilled teachers who understand how learning truly happens (Delphi panelist).

| To shift educational experiences in schools, develop students’ core learning capacities.

Around the world, children need experiences in and out of school that support the development of a range
of foundational skills essential for learning. These skills, often described as a suite of brain processes,
include things such as self-control, working memory, selective attention, and cognitive flexibility (Diamond
2013). Children develop these skills starting from the moment they are born up until and through early
adulthood. These skills can be taught, improve with practice, and are essential for children's cognitive,
social, and emotional development. They help children succeed in school and life, from learning to read

to addressing unexpected challenges, and from seeing other people's perspectives to solving problems
(Diamond 2013; Galinsky 2024).

The potential risk, that poor Al use may undermine these foundational learning capacities, can be
mitigated through shifting teaching and learning experiences, including employing the actions in the
Box 17 below.

Strategies to support students’
core learning capacities

Playful and interactive learning acti 's. Educators can help students develop core learning ca-
pacities by incorporating playful and interactive pedagogical approaches into their regular lessons.
For the early years, this can include strategies such as students practicing reading to each other, with
one student listening (and not interrupting), then asking a question after the reader is done. This helps
children develop their self-control, attention, and working memory. Collaborative storytelling, where
children play together, including taking on roles in a pretend scenario (such as playing grandma cook-
ing at home), helps develop cognitive flexibility. From the Tools of the Mind intervention in the U.S.,
to group play and physical activity in China, to cards and table top games in Spain, there are a wide
range of ways educators can incorporate these activities into their regular lessons (Diamond and Lee
2011; Bodrova and Leong 2007; Bai et al. 2022; Vita-Barrull et al. 2023). As children grow, these skills

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
develop further. Once-in-time tests that ask students to recall information are much less helpful in
developing these essential capabilities than when educators ask students to engage in ethical dialogue,
debates (including switching sides midway through), or when students undertake tasks that require
them to plan, monitor, and adapt their work (Alexander 2018; Immordino-Yang 2025).

School phone bans with a pedagogical exception. Cell phones provide a host of distractions to young
people and can interfere with children's attention. With the integration of Al into virtually all technol-

ogy platforms, including social media, the ongoing call to limit student cell phone use in schools will
continue to be important. Many school systems have already instituted limited student cell phone use,
including “bell-to-bell” phone bans that ensure young people spend time interacting in person during
mealtimes and breaks (Economist 2025). However, for low-resource schools, including those without
science labs or access to other technology, phones may be the one access point where educators can
provide useful technology-based learning opportunities, including learning about Al. In these contexts,
limiting student phone use throughout the day, except for legitimate pedagogical use, when sanctioned
by educators, is helpful for students social as well as academic development.

To shift educational experiences in schools, develop students’ knowledge and understanding,
through interdisciplinary frameworks.

Education systems must recognize the humanities and social sciences as essential foundations for
developing critical thinking and ethical reflection; students in particular need frameworks for making sense
of acquired knowledge through the exploration of ideas and ethical deliberation. An integrated humanities
approach can blend the rigor of mathematics, science, and engineering with interpretive and contextual
insights from humanistic inquiry. As part of this, STEM can be taught from a humanities perspective. For
example, when students construct machine learning models, they can simultaneously examine how biased
data perpetuates community harm; when studying computer science, they can engage substantively with
questions of fairness and technology's societal implications. By situating STEM learning within social,
historical, and ethical contexts, education prepares students not merely as Al users but as critical thinkers
capable of interrogating Al's underlying assumptions while developing information and media literacy as
essential competencies across all disciplines (Delphi panelists).

This integrated curriculum spanning all grade levels cultivates versatile individuals through systematic
incorporation of literature, philosophy, linguistics, culture, and ethics into technical subjects. For example,
a biology unit on biomedical engineering could integrate structured debates about genome editing with
CRISPR or genetic modification of foods, wherein students apply classical philosophical frameworks—
Stoicism, Aristotelianism, utilitarianism, nihilism, pragmatism, or existentialism—to evaluate the ethical
dimensions of biotechnological possibilities (Delphi panelist).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Strategies to support students’
nowledge and understanding, through
interdisciplinary frameworks

Use philosophy to understand the difference between can and should. Students learn what can be
done through scientific method and subjects like math, science, and history. Equally important—espe-
cially in an Al-driven world—is grappling with what should be done. As Klein et al. observe, Al “models
make words but people make meaning” (1). Philosophy, alongside other humanities disciplines, is
uniquely positioned to guide this work. Integrating philosophical approaches fosters ethical, reflec-
tive, and deliberative thinking, with ripple effects that strengthen learning across subjects (Education
Endowment Foundation 2014). Helping young people make sense of their knowledge in an Al world
is essential.

Multimodal approaches to learning. Al has the potential to transform teaching and learning through
multimodal approaches. While most instruction worldwide remains heavily text-based, research in the
learning sciences, including from professor Heng Luo of Central China Normal University, shows that
integrating text, images, speech, gesture, simulation, and embodied interaction significantly enhances
comprehension, retention, and transfer (Luo 2023; Arifin et al. 2024). Al can facilitate these diverse
ways of engaging with material, thus aligning with Universal Design for Learning principles that reduce
learner variability by supporting diverse student needs (CAST, n. Innovators from India to the U.S.
are experimenting with Al-enhanced VR to bring biology and chemistry concepts to life (Hale et al.
2025; Luo et al. 2021; Rahimi et al. 2025; FotonVR 2025), while others provide historical figure chat-
bots for student interaction (Muncey 2025). Students, too, are finding creative applications, using Al
to generate podcasts from class notes or create personalized quizzes for test preparation.

| To shift educational experiences in schools, support students’ social and civic development.

An important purpose of schools in an Al-infused world is to help young people learn to live together.
Across virtually every country in the world, schools are one of the most prevalent social institutions where
children can meet others, in person, outside their immediate family and neighborhood. The role of schools
in helping children develop empathy, respect, and tolerance, among other essential social capabilities,

is an important counterbalance to the growing polarization of online discourse and interactions. Leaders
worldwide have for many years argued that education should help people understand others, build a
sense of shared humanity, and develop the skills to collectively achieve shared goals (Delors 1998). The
actions in Box 19 can help advance this.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Strategies to support students’
social and civic development

Youth-led civic learning in and outside of school. Civic learning helps students develop the knowledge,
beliefs, and behaviors needed to participate in civic life (Winthrop 2020). Schools and their communities
can actively curate opportunities for civic learning that help young people develop civic knowledge
and mindsets and practice civic behavior. This can include inviting students to make a contribution in
a range of spaces in and out of school, such as identifying and solving a problem at school, making
a piece of art for their neighborhood, speaking at a community event, participating in a discussion on
difficult topics with neighbors, and joining a community improvement organization (Raine et al. 2025).
Students can identify when Al extends their abilities—such as mapping local vegetation for a park
project or practicing question-and-answer responses for a presentation. But Al cannot do these ac-
tivities for students. Civic learning can also provide opportunities for students to work collaboratively,
connect with others, and advance their social interaction and development.

Civic games and simulations. Well-designed games and simulations can be an effective strategy to
support students’ civic learning and foster social connection and development. These range from offline
experiences like Model United Nations, a program schools around the world use to role-play United
Nations-style debate and deliberation, to Al-enriched online experiences (Jesuit and Endless 2018).
Game designers can collaborate with young people in harnessing Al to advance online civic learning
games and simulations, including those currently used by educators such as online government role
plays or games helping young people learn about relationships, communication, and collaborative
action (Rivers and Bertoli 2024; iThrive Games 2025; European Union 2025).

To shift educational experiences in schools, foster students’ motivation and agency, including
through real-world learning.

Perhaps one of the most important roles of education systems in a world of rapid Al advancements is to
foster students’ internal motivation to learn alongside their ability to proactively navigate their own learning
journey. One way to mitigate the potential risk of Al increasing students’ passivity and self-efficacy is to
encourage them to set and pursue a meaningful goal—that is, to foster their agency. Student motivation,
engagement, and agency are interrelated, shaped by the environments they are in, and can change
quickly with a shift in context (Reeve et al. 2022). Learning experiences that connect to students’ interests
and provide students with some measure of choice and control can help boost their motivation and
engagement and give them a chance to develop agency (Anderson and Winthrop 2025). While there are
many ways to boost student motivation, engagement, and agency—including the pedagogical approaches
discussed above—experiential learning opportunities that help connect student learning to real-world
issues and the world of work are especially well suited for doing this.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Strategies to support students’
motivation and agency, including
through real-world learning

Al-supported experiential learning. A wide range of teaching and learning approaches can help foster
student motivation, engagement, and agency. These can include project-based and career-connected
learning approaches. In these types of experiential learning experiences, Al can be a helpful tool for
students: assisting in identifying problems in their school or community and developing and implement
a solution. Rather than offloading learning, students’ use of Al in this scenario extends it—whether
primary school students leverage Al to improve trash collection or secondary school students use it
to develop a new product or business (Pandit et al. 2025; Riverside Learning Center 2025; Johansen
2018). Students can work together in groups on projects that are connected to local business, civil
society, or governments. Online experiential learning simulations that are powered by Al have the
potential to provide students opportunities to practice real-world skills from job interviews to pitch
sessions for aspiring entrepreneurs (Mollick et al. 2024). This can provide students with opportuni-
ties to exercise their initiative and creativity in the context of real-world industries. Examples include
entrepreneurship training programs around the world, like those supported by Junior Achievement,
using Al agents to give secondary school students the opportunity to practice describing the product
or service they have created as if they were pitching to an investor. Students receive real-time feed-
back and can repeatedly run through the simulation prior to presenting their ideas to business leaders
in real life (JA Worldwide, n.d.).

Student evaluation of Al. Student agency can be further fostered by giving students the opportunity
to evaluate their own use of Al. Students can run “light-touch” classroom audits, and document when
Al improves productive struggle versus when it increases cognitive offloading. This information can
then be shared with school leaders to inform policies and practices around Al use.

CO-CREATE EDUCATION AI TOOLS WITH EDUCATORS, STUDENTS, PARENTS,
AND COMMUNITIES

Al companies whose products are designed wholly or in part for education must move beyond what one
educational Al engineer describes as “superficial” consultations with educators, students, and families

to deeply engage users in co-creating these products. This is especially true for companies that develop
educator- and learner-facing tools. This collaborative approach supports educator and student buy-in and
trust. It helps educational Al tools align with research-based learning practices that enhance rather than
undermine essential teaching and learning experiences across diverse contexts and populations. This
approach also addresses the persistent critique of many educational technology products: that they are
simply old wine in new bottles—outdated pedagogical approaches in technically sleek packaging (Chen et
al. 2025). By working together to co-create use cases and designs that leverage Al's potential for powerful

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
agentic teaching, these educational Al products can better serve students and their teachers. This can
include the approaches below:

| To co-create Al tools, establish teacher-tech co-design hubs.

In interviews, teachers expressed frustration that "Al is being done to us, not with us," and evidence
suggests that successful Al companies meaningfully engage educators and other stakeholders from
the earliest stages (Cukurova 2025). One approach that teacher organizations and unions, technology
companies, governments, and researchers can take is to establish co-creation hubs in each major
education jurisdiction so teachers (together with technologists) help lead the design of Al tools with
the support of governments and researchers. The examples in Box 21 demonstrate the diversity of
approaches these hubs can take.

Teacher-tech co-design hubs

NOLAI is a government-funded program that sup-
ports a university, teacher union, schools, and an ed-tech company collaboration on Al and educa-
tion. Housed at Radboud Universiteit in the Netherlands, it brings together schools, teachers, ed-tech
companies, and researchers to develop Al tools and use cases, test them in schools, and evaluate
their impact (Radboud Universiteit 2025, Turner 2022). Key elements include:

Government funding for a 10-year period (2022-2032) allows the lab to plan long-term and finance
prototype educational Al products

Joint purpose: All stakeholders collaborate to improve primary and secondary education identifying
where Al can help

Co-creation of projects: Research questions developed collaboratively between teachers, school
leaders, researchers, and business

Joint oversight through a steering group representing education, academia, and business, with
government advice through a program council

Evaluation and shared knowledge: academics are involved throughout, and findings will be shared
with schools and businesses

OpenAl, Microsoft, and
Anthropic pledged $23 million to the American Federation of Teachers to open a free training cen-
ter, the National Academy for Al Instruction in New York City, for teachers and school staff to learn
Al responsibly and ethically (Kelly 2025; Microsoft Source 2025a; Scragg 2025; Singer 2025c). Key
elements of the center include:

Joint leadership from union leaders and public/private stakeholders

Free in-person and online training with pathways to credentials and continuing education credits
Two-way communication enabling teachers to inform students how tech companies develop Al
for students

Tool agnostic: The Academy introduces multiple Al tools, including those from funders and oth-
er companies

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

| To co-create Al tools, involve students and parents in Al decisionmaking and design.

Education systems can involve students and parents in how to best use and roll out Al in education. In
many classrooms, teachers are learning about Al use alongside students. Young people especially, if
given the chance, have meaningful contributions to make on how Al is used well to support their learning,
creativity, and connection (Rithm Project 2025; Center for Digital Thriving 2025). Some strategies for
systematically partnering with students are included in Box 22.

Involving students and parents in
Al decisionmaking and design

Student Al Councils. Creating Al councils within education jurisdictions can serve as mechanisms for
embedding student voice in the co-design of Al tools to ensure their relevance, inclusivity, and ped-
agogical soundness before adoption. Council members could help develop Al policies for education
jurisdictions or schools. Students on the council could also play an important role in vetting Al products

before purchasing. Their participation can enhance alignment with real classroom needs and foster
a sense of shared accountability. These councils could also provide early detection of misuse risks
while cultivating Al literacy and civic engagement among youth. They could convene short design
sprints where students collaborate with teachers, developers, and policymakers to test Al tools for
usability, accessibility, and cultural context; incorporate student feedback into procurement and pilot
decisions; and document lessons learned and share them through an open repository to guide future
procurement and implementation of Al tools.

Student and parent representation on technology committees. Where schools and school districts
have technology committees, student representatives from both the primary and secondary levels, as
well as family members, should serve as members of these committees.

| To co-create Al tools, support local language and community Al initiatives.

Technology companies, governments, civil society organizations, researchers and communities can help
include marginalized communities’ and countries’ voices in Al development, adoption, and integration.
This is one important way to ensure that Al tools remain accessible, support digital equity, and do not
perpetuate harmful biases. Al adoption must begin with listening; this means employing co-design
processes with a focus on underserved communities, thereby allowing schools to develop applications
reflecting their specific contexts, values, and educational needs rather than importing external solutions
(Bozkurt et al. 2024; Weaver 2022; Ruiz et al. 2024; Delphi panelists).

Governments and technology companies can support civil society, researchers, and communities to
develop a global network of local language initiatives to share information, resources, and advance the
field. Important strategies to do this are investing in community-driven datasets, training multilingual
models on representative samples, providing linguistic expertise for expanding machine translation

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
capabilities, and offering access to scholars who guide data collection, verify accuracy, and identify
resources (Okolo and Tano 2024). Several initiatives across Africa demonstrate how this can be done, as
seen in Box 23 below.

Additionally, technology companies themselves can play a critical role in ensuring greater linguistic
equity. For example, BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) is a widely used
open-source multilingual Al language model originally developed by Google. It understands words by
examining their complete context—reading both what comes before and after each word simultaneously.
This bidirectional approach makes BERT particularly effective at understanding meaning across different
languages with varied grammatical structures and word orders. Several initiatives, some of which are
profiled in Box 23, have recognized the potential of transformer-based architectures, such as BERT, to
support African-language and Asian-language natural language processing, particularly in contexts where
local language training data are scare.

Local language and community
Al initiatives

Ghana Natural Language Processing (Ghana NLP) identified that most African languages are either
absent from or poorly represented in systems such as Google Translate. To address this gap, Ghana
NLP developed ABENA (“A BERT Now in Akan”), a transformer model fine-tuned from multilingual BERT
(mBERT) and adapted for Twi/Akan, a major Ghanaian language also spoken in Togo and Céte d'Ivoire.
ABENA represents one of the first BERT-family models for a Ghanaian language, while Ghana NLP also
focuses on improving datasets and methods optimized for low-resource settings (GhanaNLP 2025).

Masakhane, a pan-Africa, community-driven research collective, promotes collaboration and ca-
pacity building in African language natural language processing. Its community of researchers across
the continent co-develops datasets, fine-tunes multilingual transformer models such as mBERT and
XLM-RoBERTa, and publishes research that advances African-language processing (Masakhane, n.d.).

Beyond sub-Saharan Africa, regional transformer projects demonstrate the adaptability of BERT-family
architectures to underrepresented languages. Two examples are IndicBERT for Indian languages and
SEA-LION for Southeast Asian languages. These models, typically trained from scratch or fine-tuned
from multilingual BERT, aim to produce tools that better capture linguistic and cultural nuances than
English-centric models, thereby mitigating bias and improving inclusion in Al systems (Pava et al.
2025, 14).

Not all language initiatives need to use BERT-family architecture. Lesan.ai, based in Ethiopia, does not
use the BERT encoder-only architecture, rather it applies machine translation techniques to expand
access for underrepresented languages. Its system supports bidirectional translation among English
and widespread Ethiopian and Eritrean languages such as Amharic and Tigrinya (Lesan.ai, n.d.).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
3] USE Al TOOLS THAT TEACH, NOT TELL

LLMs typically operate through a simple prompt-response structure whereby the Al generates a complete
answer in a single automated step (Wan et al. 2024), inducing passivity and cognitive offloading that
undermines learning for many students. This design limitation is not inherent to all Al applications in
education.

To use Al tools that teach, not tell, technology companies can incorporate child-optimized
approaches to their products.

While many ed-tech companies may design Al tools drawing on vetted content and the science of learning
and child development, general purpose Al technologies like LLMs are often not optimized to advance
children's learning. Fortunately, several technically feasible design strategies could help Al better support
children's development and learning. Technology companies, especially those with student-facing tools,
can use the approaches in Box 24.

Child-friendly product design

“Antagonistic” design. Al companies can design “antagonistic” Al tools and systems that compel
users to confront their assumptions, build resilience, and develop healthier relational boundaries with
Al technologies. These models may prove particularly beneficial in educational settings. Rather than
consistently validating student choice, as current sycophantic Al tools often do, antagonistic models
can be trained to challenge, critique, and productively disagree with users. This approach pushes stu-
dents toward greater self-reflection and higher quality standards while strengthening their ideas and
arguments and mitigating potential harm to their judgment, socialization, and resilience (Cai et al. 2024).

Progressive disclosure. Al models can be designed to utilize “progressive disclosure.” This technique,
borrowed from User Design Experiences in online learning, involves showing only essential information
and gradually introducing more complex features or explanations as the user progresses or requests

UXPin 2025). Information is presented in smaller chunks so that complex information is more
easily digestible and involves users in an iterative process of learning (Burns 2023b). If done well, this
can help scaffold learning.

Explainable Al (XAl). Progressive disclosure can be combined with XAl techniques to help users un-
derstand how Al makes decisions (DiPaola et al. 2024). For example, a math tutoring platform using
XAI would not simply give the answer “42” to the question, “What is 15 + 27?” Instead, the platform
would explain its reasoning: “I broke this into parts: 15 + 20 = 35, then 35 + 7 = 42." The student can
then follow the steps and understand the method rather than just accepting the answer. XAI helps build
what Turner et al. (2022) call “calibrated trust"—appropriate skepticism and reliance on Al-generated
responses based on understanding rather than blind faith or complete rejection. When students can
see how an Al system arrived at an answer, they can better assess its validity, identify potential bias-
es, and make informed decisions about when to follow or override its suggestions based on the Al's
strengths and limitations.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
CFF strategies encourage analytical engagement with Al-generated
content by requiring users to pause and reflect before receiving assistance (Bucinca et al. 2021). For
example, a writing tutoring program might first ask students to identify three areas for improvement

in their essay before providing feedback. This approach maintains students as the primary cognitive
agents, enhancing their metacognitive and analytical skills through reflection rather than passive ac-
ceptance of Al-generated answers.

CONDUCT RESEARCH ON CHILDREN'S LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT IN AN
Al WORLD

There is an urgent need for high-quality research to track children's learning, well-being, and development
in an Al world. As teaching and learning practices shift, including with Al use, the education community
will need to regularly produce and use evidence on Al's influence on students’ cognitive, affective,
motivational, and emotional states. Research should be grounded in student experience, rigorously
examine the potential risks and benefits of Al, and be shared in usable forms for practitioners and
policymakers. When benefits and harms are identified, research must also illuminate the mechanisms
driving those effects, moving beyond documenting outcomes to understanding why and how Al produces
particular results for children (Deng et al 2025).

Research should focus on how to help students prosper in an age of Al, including real-time evidence
development to help inform current Al practices before norms are entrenched. Below are some ways
researchers and funders can help develop the knowledge base that can enable governments, education
systems, and technology companies to mitigate Al's risks and maximize its benefits, including important
areas to research.

To conduct research on children’s learning and development, prioritize research that surfaces Al
risks and how to mitigate them.

There is a need to carefully track and investigate the risks associated with Al, including those raised in this
report across children's cognitive, emotional, and social development, including the risks of diminishing
trust and increasing dependence. The education community needs to better understand the extent of
these risks: how and under what conditions children are most susceptible. For example, further research
is needed to understand how social chatbots can help individuals address social challenges and to
identify the conditions that may lead to unhealthy engagement, such as overuse, dependence, or reduced
human socialization (Franze et al. 2023). But most importantly, there is a need to better understand how
to effectively mitigate these risks. What designs, levers, interventions, practices, norms, and policies are
effective in reducing or eliminating the risks children face?

To conduct research on children’s learning and development, focus on research that understands
how to leverage Al to benefit children’s learning and development.

Alongside better understanding the risks of Al and how to mitigate them, there is a need for research
that uncovers the specific use cases, approaches, and contexts in which Al can be used to expand
children’s learning and development, including the benefits identified in this report. Which students

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 139
(e.g., neurodivergent or L2 learners) benefit from Al use? Under what conditions, with what designs, and
through what types of implementation does Al help students expand their understanding, develop their
skills, build their connections to others? For example, therapeutic interventions have advanced to a degree
of sophistication whereby their responses are virtually indistinguishable from those written by humans
(Zao-Sanders 2025; Heinz et al. 2025; Hatch et al. 2025). Research on how these increasingly available
interventions could help address the youth mental health crisis students who lack regular or immediate
access to mental health professionals is warranted (Heinz et al. 2025; Mahari and Pataranutaporn 2025).

| To conduct research on children’s learning and development, include research that centers teachers.

Teachers, whose experiences with Al have thus far been underexamined, should play an integral role in
this research so the education community can gather a fuller sense of how Al impacts the entirety of the
student learning process. Teachers are central to research on how to use Al—and what supports they
need—to enrich student experiences and strengthen motivation, engagement, and agency. Researchers
from the University of Oulu argue that teachers can also serve as models for Al training, feed data to

the Al system (for example, lesson plan ideas), and determine assessment criteria (Celik et al. 2022).
This participation also has the added effect of helping teachers better understand Al itself and its role

in learning.

To conduct research on children's learning and development, prioritize research on Al in low-
resource settings, including examining system dynamics.

To develop and apply effective Al in education in the most challenging environments, educators require
context-specific research that examines Al interventions within specific contexts, cultures, and education
systems. The effects of Al innovations are often incremental and may not completely visible by the end of
a project or initiative. To truly capture the impact of Al on children’s learning and well-being, funders of Al
initiatives can support research that extends beyond the lifespan of particular projects, especially when
funding operates within fixed or predetermined time periods. This research must concentrate not only

on the intervention itself but also on the systems and stakeholders that influence whether learning gains
transfer and persist over time (Burns 2020, 50).

| To conduct research on children’s learning and development, use a variety of research approaches.
A variety of research approaches is needed, from real-time actionable insights to longitudinal studies, to

address the range of questions on how to help children prosper in an age of Al. Box 25 outlines some of
these approaches.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 140
Diverse research approaches
to study Al and education

Educators and Al practitioners need research to inform their decisions, yet may often eschew it be-
cause they view research as lacking practical utility and disconnected from the lived experiences of
those implementing and receiving interventions. To address these issues, researchers can embrace a
“utilization-focused” approach wherein research is designed for specific users rather than a general
audience, and primary intended users are involved in the research design and process (Patton 2008).
By including student, teacher, and parent perspectives, expertise, and experiences, research findings
produce deeper, more nuanced insights than external studies alone, leading to more compelling and
coherent explanatory narratives. This ultimately makes the research more evidence-based, humanistic,
and usable to decisionmakers, practitioners, and educators (Burns 2020 50-51).

The social
media experience demonstrates why urgency is critical. As Bernstein (2022) notes, by the time research
on social media's effects on children became widely available, platform business models had already
been built around engagement-maximizing algorithms, users had developed dependency patterns,
billions in revenue streams were at stake, and regulatory efforts faced entrenched resistance and
significantly higher implementation costs. The Al landscape still remains malleable. Companies with
products children access continue experimenting with design features, users have not yet formed fixed
usage patterns, and fundamental questions about Al's impacts on children remain open (Bernstein
2022). Researchers must document and disseminate what is known about Al's effects on children’s
learning and well-being now, while evidence can still inform design decisions, policy frameworks, and
educational practices before harmful patterns become embedded in both technology and behavior. The
window for preventive action is narrow (Bernstein 2022, 2025). Children are in critical developmental
periods where cognitive, social, and emotional capacities are being formed. Interventions that shape Al's
role in education today can prevent the need for far more difficult and costly remediation efforts later.

Many prescription drugs are available and widely used even though
researchers and doctors may not fully understand the exact mechanisms by which they produce
their effects. Governments might consider whether Al technologies used by virtually all primary and
secondary students should be studied in similar ways to pharmaceuticals, that is, through a series of
clinical trials that produce risk-benefit analyses and public labeling of proven harms to student learning
or well-being. As part of this, researchers and education systems could continuously monitor these
applications to assess whether new warnings should be added or whether access should be limited for
students of certain age groups or with particular neurological or affective conditions (Delphi panelist).

Greater research on Al in educa-
tion can generate opportunities to develop pilots, sandboxes, proofs-of-concept, and action research
initiatives in partnership with research institutions. Such efforts can demonstrate measurable impact,
accelerate the translation of evidence into practice, and determine which models of Al work under

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

what conditions (Joel Mitchell, personal communication, August 29, 2025). These pilots should aim to
identify the tipping point at which investment in Al leads to measurable positive impacts on problems
facing low-resource countries. Educators and policymakers in sub-Saharan Africa interviewed for this
study emphasized the importance of demonstrating how strategic Al investments can address systemic
educational challenges such as teacher shortages, infrastructure gaps, and inadequate learning tools
across different cohorts and demographics. Beginning iteratively with small-scale approaches may
provide essential proofs of concept before scaling. Establishing mechanisms for systematic evalua-
tion and evidence-based expansion enables the creation of frameworks that balance innovation with
prudent resource management, creating pathways from promising pilots to sustainable, large-scale
Al initiatives in education.

Produce rigorous, empirical, and longitudinal research on Al in education. Al is in urgent need of
rigorous and longitudinal research. Indeed, most educators are implementing practices without the
benefit of empirical evidence. Such research can involve properly isolating variables, measuring actual
learning outcomes, considering long-term impacts, exploring innovative instructional designs, and
providing sufficient detail for replication (Trabelsi 2025).

Consider the Bradford Hill criteria for student emotional well-being research. Researchers can apply
the Bradford Hill criteria to study the impact of Al on students’ emotional well-being. These widely
respected scientific principles assess the strength of evidence for causal relationships between vari-
ables. They are particularly valuable for determining whether exposure to a risk factor, such as an Al
companion bot, determines adverse outcomes, especially in contexts in which randomized controlled
trials are difficult or impossible to implement (Lembke 2023).

Prepare

Governments, education systems, funders, civil society organizations, families, communities, and young
people themselves must collaborate to help students navigate an Al world. Preparation requires building
the knowledge, capacity, and structures for ethical and effective Al integration, ensuring that schools
develop clear Al visions with dedicated resources, organized adoption processes, and measurable
evaluation criteria to track implementation success.

To ensure that young people and our education systems are prepared for an Al world, governments,
funders, private sector, education systems, families, and communities can work together to advance these
four main actions:

5. Promote holistic Al literacy for students, teachers, parents, and education leaders. Integrating
ethical understanding, critical thinking, and practical skills across curricula and communities helps to
ensure all learners can engage with Al confidently, creatively, and responsibly.

6. Prepare teachers to teach with and through Al. Both pre-service preparation and in-service training
equip future and current teachers, respectively, with the knowledge, skills, and confidence to use Al
responsibly, model critical thinking, and preserve authentic student learning.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
7. Provide a clear vision for ethical Al use that centers human agency. Education systems should
prioritize student agency, ethical learning, critical thinking, and ensure that Al tools are vetted against
rigorous criteria that promote human reflection, transparency, and genuine intellectual growth.

8. Employ innovative financing strategies to close the Al divide. There are multiple ways that actors,
especially governments and education systems, can help reverse the growing Al divide, from equity-
focused policies to innovative financing mechanisms for expanding school connectivity.

PROMOTE HOLISTIC Al LITERACY FOR STUDENTS, TEACHERS, PARENTS,
AND EDUCATION LEADERS

One of the most important steps to prepare education systems to harness Al in a way that will help
learners prosper is to cultivate holistic Al literacy skills of the adults and children within education systems.
Developing Al literacy skills does not require teachers or students to spend extensive time on screens.
Rather, it can include in-person discussion and reflection alongside some practice and exploration of Al
tools themselves.

TeachAl, a global coalition of educationalists, defines Al literacy as the knowledge, skills, and attitudes
associated with how Al works, including its principles, concepts, and limitations, as well as how to use Al
(TeachAl 2025). Participants in this study emphasized the need for “holistic” Al literacy, which empowers
learners to “engage with, manage, create, and design Al systems while understanding the ethical, social,
and cognitive implications of their use” (European Commission and OECD 2025). With this framework in
mind, governments and education systems can provide guidance to educators on what students should
know and be able to do in order to be considered Al literate.

! To promote holistic Al literacy, adopt holistic Al frameworks.

There is no shortage of holistic Al frameworks that governments and education systems can draw

upon. Education systems and governments can look to other countries who are embracing holistic Al
approaches and rolling them out nationally. For example, the government of China requires that students
receive at least eight hours of Al education a year beginning at age six, outlines four key areas of Al
literacy (cognition, skills, thinking, and values), with students in lower grades focused on awareness of
Al while students in higher grades focus on creating and problem-solving with Al (Australian Government
Department of Education 2025).

There are also a wide range of useful holistic Al literacy frameworks developed by global networks,
universities, and civil society organizations that are used by education jurisdictions around the world.

The Al Literacy Framework for Primary and Secondary Education, developed jointly by the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation (OECD) and European Commission with support from Code.org and an

expert group of international educators, researchers, and technologists, approaches Al literacy broadly;

as cited above this framework includes learning how Al works, from understanding the ethics to how to
harness its power in problem solving (European Commission and OECD 2025). There are multiple teacher
professional development offerings; The International Society for Technology in Education and Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ISTE+ASCD) offers Al courses, and UNESCO's Guidance on
Generative Al outlines holistic teacher competencies (ISTE 2025; Miao and Holmes 2023).

Annex A reviews a range of Al literacy frameworks from China and Uruguay to Digital Promise and MIT.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 143
| To promote holistic Al literacy, create or adopt guidelines for Al literacy.

Education systems can prioritize holistic Al literacy guidance. While many countries operate highly
decentralized educational systems, both centralized and decentralized approaches can successfully
implement Al literacy frameworks. Countries with centralized systems, such as China and Estonia, have
implemented comprehensive national Al literacy guidelines that provide consistent standards across all
schools (Asian College of Teachers 2025, e-Estonia 2025). In Singapore, teaching on Al's uses, risks,
limitations, and ethical considerations is embedded across different school subjects, along with instruction
on verifying online information and understanding data security and privacy (Ang 2024).

Countries with decentralized education systems have also established effective national frameworks.
India, despite significant state-level autonomy in education, developed national Al literacy guidelines
through the National Education Policy 2020 and the Central Board of Secondary Education, which
introduced Al as a subject for students in grades 9-12 and created an Al Facilitator Handbook for
educators (Ahuja et al., n.d.; Mehra 2020).

There remains a compelling advantage to establishing centralized national guidelines that define Al
literacy. Without coordinated national involvement, students may receive vastly different levels of Al
literacy preparation depending solely on their geographic location, creating inequitable educational
outcomes in an increasingly Al-dependent society. National guidelines can ensure consistent foundational
knowledge while still allowing for local adaptation to meet specific regional needs and contexts.

! To promote holistic Al literacy, support systemic Al literacy approaches.

In the interest of deep Al literacy, education systems can integrate these approaches across grades/levels
and the curriculum, rather than confining it to isolated courses or particular disciplines such as computer
science (DiPaola et al. 2024, 8; European Commission and OECD 2025; Dhar 2025). A growing number
of secondary schools and higher education institutions are adopting this comprehensive approach, which
helps students encounter these concepts throughout their learning experiences.

Implementation can reflect developmental appropriateness, beginning with playful and offline learning
opportunities for young children that introduce foundational concepts through age-appropriate
experiences. As students mature, they can progressively experiment with Al systems, building both
technical familiarity and critical understanding through hands-on engagement. This scaffolded
approach recognizes that meaningful Al literacy develops over time and requires repeated encounters
across contexts.

! To promote holistic Al literacy, support peer-to-peer Al literacy.

Students can play a powerful role in Al literacy with their peers. Education systems can train student
facilitators to develop and deliver short sessions to their peers on a range of topics related to Al use, their
education, and well-being. For example, sessions could address prompt hygiene, verification habits, when
not to use Al, debates on ethical uses of Al, and strategies for switching from Al to human help. Peer-led Al
literacy normalizes responsible, inquiry-based use of generative tools while easing teacher capacity gaps.
It transforms Al from a passive technology into shared learning grounded in reflection and accountability.

! To promote holistic Al literacy, include families and communities in Al literacy.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 144
Education systems can work with families and caregivers to extend Al literacy skills and guidance from
school into home environments. This requires training school administrators and teachers in effective
family engagement approaches that center families as active partners and provide space to co-create
solutions (Winthrop et al. 2021). Through intentional communication, trust building, and understanding

of diverse belief systems, teachers can learn about caregivers’ perceptions of children's technology use
and establish shared guidelines for responsible Al engagement. Such partnerships can create consistent
messaging about healthy relationships with technology and authentic human connection (Delphi panelist).

Al literacy will be especially useful if it extends beyond students to encompass the entire school
community. Principals, teachers, students, and parents can all develop an understanding of how
algorithms shape their daily lives and acquire the capacity to critically interrogate the systems operating
around them (Dhar 2025). This shared literacy creates a foundation for informed decisionmaking about
Al integration while fostering the collective critical consciousness necessary to navigate an increasingly
algorithm-mediated educational landscape. India’s "Al Samarth" initiative exemplifies this approach by
providing Al literacy for students, teachers, and parents, thereby fostering a greater sense of shared
understanding and alignment around Al and education across the entire school community (Central
Square Foundation 2025).

6) PREPARE TEACHERS TO TEACH WITH AND THROUGH Al

As ISTE correctly notes, “there are no Al literate students without Al literate teachers” (ISTE 2024). The
integration of Al into education demands a fundamental transformation in how we prepare and support
educators. Teacher pre-service or preparation programs globally have historically lagged in modeling
effective technology integration (Burns 2023a). Teachers require comprehensive guidance in order to
navigate the proliferation of Al education tools, develop expertise in productive and ethical Al integration,
and master the delicate balance between leveraging Al's capabilities and preparing students to use these
tools while preserving authentic student learning and agency. Education systems and civil society can
support this transformation across pre-service preparation—the education and preparation a person
receives before becoming a teacher—and in-service professional development—the support and training
current teachers receive.

! To prepare teachers, integrate Al literacy into pre-service teacher preparation.

Teacher pre-service preparation programs can integrate Al literacy throughout their curricula through the
following approaches:

« Provide practical experience integrating Al into classroom instruction rather than limiting preparation to
theoretical Al literacy knowledge, enabling future teachers to develop essential confidence and self-
efficacy in Al implementation (Park 2023)

* Develop comprehensive understanding of Al's dual nature in education by helping pre-service teachers
recognize how Al can both support and potentially harm children's learning and development, while
building a repertoire of use cases and instructional activities that strengthen students’ abilities to
perceive, remember, form concepts, solve problems, imagine, and reason (American Psychological
Association 2025a)

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 145
« Emphasize metacognitive skill development to prepare future teachers to cultivate students’ awareness
of when and how to use Al tools responsibly without compromising students’ cognitive development
(Bozkurt et al. 2024)

« Establish new graduation requirements and instructional models that require faculty in teacher training
institutions to develop their own capacity for modeling ethical, responsible, and effective Al integration,
addressing current uncertainties about appropriate Al use in teaching and learning (Weiner et al. 2024;
Burns 2023a)

To prepare teachers, support teachers in teaching with Al through in-service professional
development.

In-service training for practicing teachers, also known as continuing professional development, can also
support teachers in teaching with Al and can be strategically designed and implemented through:

« Differentiated and sustained professional development that precedes and accompanies Al
implementation. This professional development should strengthen teachers’ content knowledge so they
can verify Al outputs. It should also enhance teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge to seamlessly
blend content, teaching strategies, and Al technology into high-quality learning experiences.

« Instructional approaches that help teachers balance and navigate the complex relationship between
Al use and pedagogical choices. Teachers need to recognize that different instructional methods
create varied opportunities for cognitive offloading. They may need guidance on selecting appropriate
strategies and titrating Al use to maximize learning benefits across diverse pedagogical approaches
that include both direct instruction and learner-centered methodologies (Hill et al. 2022).

* Curriculum-aligned activity design that employs Al meaningfully while preventing opportunities for
students to offload cognitive work or replace genuine effort with Al-generated outputs.

* Collective professional learning communities organized by subject area and grade level, ensuring
professional development remains consistent with standards and policies, grounded in current
research on effective Al use, and supported by ongoing follow-up to improve implementation fidelity
and transfer of learning (Burns 2023a).

A number of education systems are incorporating Al into teacher training curricula. In Singapore,
for example, by 2026, the National Institute of Education will offer training in Al in education to all
undergraduate, post-graduate, and in-service teachers (Kai 2022).

Students can also be involved in teacher professional development. For example, training programs
can develop student mini-labs, where teachers bring draft activities and students test them for
clarity, temptation to over-offload, and inclusion. This provides teachers with rapid feedback before
lessons go live.

PROVIDE A CLEAR VISION FOR ETHICAL Al USE THAT CENTERS
HUMAN AGENCY

Thinking and learning are not tasks to be outsourced to Al—they are how students build their identity,
agency, and dreams. While Al offers speed and fluency, it cannot experience wonder, wrestle with doubt,
or choose values. Education systems can help students see that struggling to find their own words and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 146
pursue their own questions is what makes learning meaningful and life worth living (Delphi panelist). They
can do this by developing a clear vision for how Al can be used to help ethically advance human agency.

! To provide a clear vision for ethical Al use that centers human agency, first create a solid policy.

Education systems from the school level on up can develop and broadly disseminate this vision either
through creating new policies or incorporating the vision into existing relevant guidance and policies.
Educational policies can encourage students to use Al to expand their ability to explore and learn—
processes that require critical thinking and personal engagement rather than cognitive offloading. For
example, in the U.S., the Washington Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction has issued guidance
on using Al in K-12 schools that promotes a human-centered approach. This guidance states that good Al
use “always starts with human inputs and inquiry, and always concludes with human reflection and edits.”
It notes that Al should be used to empower students to actively participate in their education, not replace
student development (Washington Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction 2024, 14). Studies
show that when schools or universities have Al policies, teachers and students are more likely to use Al
(Gallup 2025; Xiao et al. 2023).

8} EMPLOY INNOVATIVE FINANCING STRATEGIES TO CLOSE THE AI DIVIDE

Designing for equity is often a political choice involving prioritizing access to quality learning, deliberately
directing resources to marginalized communities, and developing locally tailored initiatives. To do

this, governments, educational systems, funders, and technology companies can embrace inclusion,
justice, and equity, embodying what Leandro Folgar Ruétalo, vice president of innovation at Universidad
Catolica del Uruguay, describes as “equity extends to all human beings." This ensures that all students
can meaningfully participate in Al transformation. Rather than using readiness criteria that exclude
marginalized communities, this approach requires supporting underresourced education systems, schools,
and communities through targeted policies and strategic resource reallocation (Delphi panelist). There are
a range of strategies that can help advance this priority.

To employ innovative financing strategies to close the Al divide, promote equitable access to Al
infrastructure through innovative financing for education.

Many education systems lack the funds or funding to adopt and implement Al in education initiatives.
Given the closure of and cuts to many bilateral aid agencies, governments in the Global South find
themselves even further behind in terms of funding and traditional funding models may be insufficient for
Al and digital infrastructure transformation.

These governments will need to explore different options to diversify Al funding, which may include
innovative approaches that create sustainable educational infrastructure while building local capacity and
ownership. One strategy for achieving this diversification is to draw on financing mechanisms already
used in broader education contexts (Patrinos and Tanaka 2024). Innovative Financing for Education (IFE)
is an umbrella term that encompasses new sources of funding, new actors, and new ways of sharing
costs, risks, and responsibilities between private and public actors to provide more funding for education.
IFE involves a number of alternative financing methods, many of them grounded in market-based and
private sector mechanisms (Avelar et al. 2020, 4). These approaches can be adapted to support Al
infrastructure in education.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 147
IFE for Al infrastructure

(PPPs) are formal arrangements between government and private orga-
nizations to jointly finance and deliver services. Technology companies have a long history of such
partnerships with governments. One of the most well-known educational technology PPP may be Intel
Teach, through which Intel trained millions of teachers globally to integrate technology into lessons
and cultivate students’ critical thinking, problem-solving, and collaboration skills.

These PPPs continue in the age of Al, with companies voluntarily providing money, tools, and services
to schools (Singer 2025c). For example, Google committed $1 billion to Al education, digital well-being,
job training, and Al research for U.S. students. The company is making advanced Al tools, including
a new Guided Learning mode, free to students and providing U.S. secondary schools with Gemini
For Education (Pichai 2025). It plans to expand its Al for Education Accelerator to over 100 colleges
and universities and create an online hub for Al education resources. In India, OpenAl partnered with
the Association for Reinventing School Education to introduce Al tools and training to K-12 educators
(Economic Times 2025). These PPPs must be carefully structured so they are not simply marketing
and customer capture strategies but rather prioritize authentic educational objectives developing
learners’ critical thinking about Als (Singer 2025a).

Such partnerships can extend beyond tech companies to include schools, pairing, for example, well-re-
sourced international or private schools in capital or large urban centers with local low-resource
government schools. In such arrangements, government school teachers work alongside or receive
coaching from private school teachers on Al use and private schools may make computer labs or lap-
top carts available to students from government schools as part of after-school programs. Teachers
from low-resource schools could adapt Al tools for offline use and share their adaptations through
open toolkits.

combine government funds, private investment, philanthropic dona-
tions, and development aid to leverage each capital type and reduce individual risk. This mechanism
attracts new sources of private capital directed towards initiatives that advance development goals,
mitigate risk, and generate potential financial returns.

involve private entities in constructing and operating educa-
tional infrastructure before transferring ownership to the public sector. As the name suggests, there
are three parts to a BOT: (design and develop the infrastructure), (run, maintain, and
monitor the system), and (after a fixed period, typically 30 years, transfer ownership so that
the host can sustain without outsourcing).

BOT models have been successfully implemented in other government sectors and public infrastruc-
ture projects (Patrinos and Tanaka 2024). However, it is difficult to find examples of BOTs involving
educational technology—typically, one of the letters, usually “T” for transfer, seems to be missing.
Nonetheless, sub-Saharan African policymakers interviewed for this study advocated for BOTs as
a possible infrastructure provision model. This approach allows educational institutions to access
immediate infrastructure improvements while spreading costs over time and ultimately gaining full

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

ownership without requiring substantial upfront capital investment, thus moving beyond traditional
“charity-based” interventions toward sustainable business models that create mutual value for private
partners and educational institutions.

Results-Based Financing (RBF) links payments to verified achievement of measurable outcomes
rather than funding activities or inputs. In the case of social and development impact bonds, one form
of RBF, social investors provide up-front capital and assume financial risk traditionally borne by gov-
ernments. By making disbursements contingent on predefined targets, education stakeholders can be
incentivized and supported to strengthen systems that support the achievement of learning outcomes
(Gustafsson-Wright et al. 2017). Though seemingly not common in terms of educational technology,
RBF approaches are increasingly common in education.

One example of an RBF is the Sierra Leone Education Innovation Challenge (SLEIC), a three-year

$18 million partnership between the Government of Sierra Leone and the Education Outcomes Fund,
with implementing partners such as Rising Academies, Save the Children, and Street Child working
across 325 public primary schools with approximately 134,000 children to boost literacy and numer-
acy outcomes.

SLEIC exemplifies results-based financing (also called outcomes-based financing), because payments
are contingent upon attaining specified results rather than simply delivering predetermined inputs or
activities and the financing structure ensures that money is spent only on activities proven to have
an impact. The model explicitly encourages partners to innovate—several, for example, use digital
tools such as WhatsApp and SMS/phones for teacher coaching. It also employs rigorous independent
evaluations and caps per-child costs at $36 to support future scalability. Results published for Year 2
show statistically significant learning gains in math and English, with payments tied to these verified
learning outcomes (Education Outcomes Fund 2024).

To employ innovative financing strategies to close the Al divide, use regulatory license requirements
to drive private sector support for school connectivity.

Governments can use creative license requirements to support bridging the Al divide. South Africa
exemplifies this by strategically leveraging its regulatory authority to mandate enhanced educational
connectivity through telecommunications licensing requirements and spectrum allocation conditions,
making school Internet access a fundamental prerequisite for operators to maintain their licenses. It
accomplishes this through two main mechanisms:

« Mandatory School Discounts (E-rate): All licensed Internet providers must offer schools at least a
50% discount from regular Internet prices. This isn't optional; it is a legal requirement that covers
everything from Internet access to equipment and phone calls to tech support. Companies that fail
to comply can be fined by the South African government (Independent Communications Authority of
South Africa, n.d.; Vecchiatto 2009).

* Connection Quotas (Universal Service Obligations): In exchange for operating licenses, or in order
to buy radio spectrum from the government, all telecommunications companies are assigned specific
numbers of schools they must connect to the Internet. Recent spectrum license holders must connect
over 18,500 public schools nationwide along with hospitals, clinics, and police stations within a

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
certain radius of schools. These renewable licenses include specific metrics for school infrastructure
development, evolving from basic computer provision to comprehensive digital infrastructure and
connectivity (Independent Communications Authority of South Africa 2021; Ellipsis 2025).

Governments can go even farther and mandate that Internet and mobile service providers offer simple,
comprehensible connectivity plans for education systems or provide credits to teachers and students
individually at fixed or subsidized rates. These requirements will enable people to access basic
connectivity options that support their educational goals with ease and at an affordable cost (West 2025).

To employ innovative financing strategies to close the Al divide, develop options for equitable
distribution of Al tools.

Governments can also help reverse the large and growing Al divide by pursuing creative pathways for
deploying Al to marginalized communities.

Strategies for equitable
distribution of Al tools

Strategic Infrastructure Deployment: Governments can consider deploying tiered infrastructure solu-
tions that accommodate varying technological capacities within education systems. This might include
offline or low-bandwidth Al tools, such as local language models embedded directly within school
devices, so that technical limitations do not become barriers to educational access and opportunity
(Delphi panelist).

Government-developed Al platforms: To limit both reliance on for-profit technology companies and
save money in licensing fees, governments can build their own Al platforms and tools for education
systems, as the government of Indonesia has done. In South Africa, the Department of Basic Education
has overseen the development of digital content for South Africa's national curriculum. The content
is completely accessible, is hosted on Department of Basic Education servers (“DBE Cloud"), is de-
vice-agnostic (mobile, tablet, and computer), and can be accessed for the equivalent of two South
African cents per day (Burns and Santally 2019, 51).

Open-source Al models: School districts in resource-constrained contexts can embrace open source
Al tools to scale equitable and quality access to advanced Al capabilities, provided appropriate tech-
nical support structures are in place. South Africa can serve as an exemplar in how to leverage open-
source technologies, given its established leadership in open education through institutions such as
the South African Institute for Distance Education and successful initiatives including Siyavula and OER
Africa (Burns and Santally 2019). Open-source libraries such as TensorFlow, PyTorch, and Hugging
Face Transformers, along with repositories like GitHub, provide accessible resources for implementing
these Al capabilities.

Deploy alternative mechanisms for expanding Internet access: While regions like sub-Saharan Africa
are achieving greater and more affordable Internet access, there remains a persistent and multifaceted

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
(geographic, economic, and gender-based) Internet divide. To address this challenge, governments
can invest in both policy and technical solutions. For example, governments can lease unused fiber
optic cable or “dark fiber,” invest in resource virtualization or satellite-based Internet, build govern-
ment-owned public education networks, levy a tax to create Universal Service Funds, and/or use

“white spaces"—wireless technology that utilizes unused television and radio frequencies to provide
wireless broadband connections. Countries such as Malawi, South Africa, Namibia, Nigeria, Tanzania,
and Zambia have expanded Internet access through various combinations of these initiatives (Burns
and Santally 2019).

To employ innovative financing strategies to close the Al divide, prioritize Al access for girls and
other marginalized groups.

The Al divide is multifaceted, with girls particularly disadvantaged in terms of Al use (Economist

2024). Technology companies, funders and governments can begin to address this divide by funding
implementation of the nonbinding Global Digital Compact (GDC), a comprehensive multi stakeholder
framework adopted in 2024 that establishes principles and actions for an open, secure digital future. The
GDC commits governments and non-state actors to bridging the digital divide, fostering data privacy,
combating misinformation, and establishing international Al governance.

The GDC calls for gender equality and the meaningful participation of all women and girls in digital spaces
to attain the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 5 (achieving gender equality and empowering
all women and girls). It advocates eliminating barriers impeding girls' access to technology and Al, greater
female leadership in technology decisions, mainstreaming gender perspectives into digital connectivity
strategies, countering technology-facilitated gender-based violence, and developing data standards
designed to prevent bias, discrimination, and human rights violations.

| Protect

Governments, education systems, technology companies, families, and students themselves share
responsibility for ensuring that the technology children use daily protects their educational development
and well-being. Protecting means safeguarding students’ privacy, safety, emotional well-being, and
cognitive and social development through ethical Al tools that enhance learning while fostering emotional
development, strong relationships, and productive struggle.

This requires technology companies to create safe, age-appropriate experiences. It requires governments
and education systems to promote Al's benefits while mitigating harms through enacting reasonable
guardrails. It also requires that the adults in students’ lives—families, educators, community leaders—work
alongside students to establish structures, routines, and modeling of ethical and responsible Al use so that
students develop the habits of mind and discernment necessary to thrive in an Al-infused world. Multiple
stakeholders can work together to:

9. Break the engagement addiction and design platforms that are centered around positive mental
health for children and youth. Al platforms should be designed to minimize manipulative engagement

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 151
features and actively promote positive mental health and well-being for young users. This includes
shifting measures of success for their products.

10. Establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al. Effective regulatory frameworks
should be flexible and should align Al governance with student rights and safety, embedding
accountability, ethical design, and data protections across all stages of educational Al development
and deployment.

11. Procure technology that protects students’ privacy, safety, and security. Education systems can
safeguard student well-being by leveraging their purchasing power to procure only technologies
with built-in privacy, safety, and security protections that prevent misuse of student data and ensure
responsible Al use in schools.

12. Support families to manage children’s Al use at home. Families and students themselves can play
an important role in mitigating Al overuse at home. This can include conversations between students
and their peers and families on their Al use and implications for their learning and well-being as well as
providing families with quality information on Al to guide their decisions at home.

BREAK THE ENGAGEMENT ADDICTION AND DESIGN PLATFORMS THAT ARE
CENTERED AROUND POSITIVE MENTAL HEALTH FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH

The question isn’t whether technology will reshape society—it is what incentives will drive that
transformation.
— Center for Humane Technology, 2025

As Al capabilities rapidly advance, developers of student-facing Al systems can prioritize ethical
considerations and implement comprehensive strategies that safeguard student well-being while
harnessing educational benefits.

| To break the engagement addiction, require online products to meet safety standards.

Governments can require online services that children access, including Al, to meet standards that protect
children's safety and well-being. Technology companies designing Al products used by children can
follow guidelines put out by child development specialists, such as the “Children and Al Design Code"
developed by the 5 Rights Foundation. These and other groups describe a clear distinction between
products developed for children and those for adults. The American Psychological Association warns that
manipulative design can interfere with “the development of healthy real-world relationships” (American
Psychological Association 2025a). Governments can require technology companies which students
access to develop products for children that meet criteria like those put forward in the Children and Al
Design Code below.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 152
Al safety standards for children

The Al system is designed and operated to account for children’s
differing needs and vulnerabilities at different ages and stages of development by design and default.

The Al system complies with applicable local, national, regional, and international law, rules,
and regulations across all domains, including, but not limited to, children’s rights, data protection
and privacy, child exploitation and abuse, illegal and harmful online content, anti-discrimination
laws, consumer protection, intellectual property, health and safety, and education.

The Al system does not create or amplify risks to the wellbeing or the physical, mental, and
emotional safety of children, including privacy and security risks.

The Al system treats children and their data fairly and creates outcomes that are just and
equitable for children.

The Al system functions as expected. Performance and outcomes remain robust over
time, including in unexpected or harsh conditions, or when atypical data is introduced....Humans
can intervene to take control if required.

It is easy for children and those who represent their interests to report concerns
and to seek actionable and effective recourse and remedy...It is easy to appeal both in-app and
without logging in. Emerging concerns or extreme incidents are swiftly and effectively addressed,
including by providing an easily reachable human contact.

Stakeholders (including children) have access to adequate and accessible information
to have a reasonable understanding of what the Al system does, its impacts, the measures taken to
account for the capacities and needs of children, and the efficiency of these measures...

A continuous chain of human and organisational responsibility is established across
the whole Al system's value chain and lifecycle...

The Al system upholds children’s rights...[as per the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child]...including their right to life, to participate, and to protection. Inherent in
children's right to life is their right to be fully realised as individuals, including meeting their need for
agency, connectedness, and purpose. The Al system prioritises children’s best interests and takes
account of their voices and opinions (5 Rights Foundation 2025, 21-22).

To break the engagement addiction, stress test Al platforms for safety.

One important way technology companies can help ensure Al products and systems are designed to
protect children's safety and privacy is to engage in robust testing prior to release. Such testing can
include the approaches in the box below.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

Strategies to stress test Al
platforms for safety

User testing: Al systems can undergo thorough and continuous user testing to determine how actual
users interact with a system under normal conditions. User testing examines usability, functionality,
user experience, and whether the system meets intended use cases. It can identify and mitigate po-
tential unintended consequences and negative impacts before widespread release.

Technical or ethical checks: This may include limiting inappropriate content exposure, disallowing
harmful academic or personal suggestions, enforcing usage breaks to prevent over-dependence,
monitoring for signs of social withdrawal, and ensuring Al interactions support rather than replace
human relationships and learning experiences (Mahari and Pataranutaporn 2025).

Inclusion of safety features: Such features could include parental controls that allow parents to link
to their children's Al accounts, set limits on time and what children can see, and receive notification if
their child's online behavior suggests potential self-harm (OpenAl 2025c).

Red teaming: Red teaming is the comprehensive, methodical probing of an Al system through sus-
tained, coordinated efforts by skilled professionals who simulate real-world adversarial attacks using
the full spectrum of techniques available to actual attackers. Once they identify these vulnerabilities,
they go about fixing them (Hao 2025).

To break the engagement addiction, employ advisory boards to ensure safeguards are in place to
protect children from harms.

Technology companies whose products are used by students can create advisory boards that include
“scientists, youth, ethicists, health professionals, and other stakeholders who are primarily charged with
the protection of adolescents” (American Psychological Association 2025a).

To break the engagement addiction, engage students in developing safeguards.

Students can co-draft default settings for time limits, logging, and nudges that push learners back to
human help when tasks cross a difficulty threshold. Students can participate in safeguarding privacy,
safety, and data ethics when schools procure or deploy Al tools by becoming “privacy stewards.” Such
participation can build institutional transparency and trust, help schools translate technical policy into
accessible language, empower students as informed digital citizens, and strengthen compliance through
bottom-up accountability. To do this, schools can first select and train a small team of student “privacy
stewards" in basic data rights, vendor transparency standards, and digital wellbeing principles. These
stewards would then be provided with vendor one-page checklists summarizing district or school
practices on data use, retention, and sharing. Student privacy stewards would beta-test Al applications

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
under consideration for purchase and flag privacy concerns or questions for district purchasing officials
for consideration.

| To break the engagement addiction, shift financial incentives from engagement to utility.

Investors and funders can help break the engagement addiction by shifting how they measure success.
Current financial incentives for child-facing technology platforms often reward companies for time spent
on the platform regardless of what young people are doing (Sindermann et al. 2024). For example,

in 2022, social media companies earned $11 billion from advertisements to children under eighteen
(Raffoul et al. 2023), tracking clicks, time spent, and advertisement impressions—metrics focused on
“engagement” rather than impact on users. From a profit-maximizing perspective, it makes little difference
whether a teenager spends an hour on a social media or Al platform learning cooking skills or an hour
learning about self-harm (Mishra and Warr 2025).

This “time on platform" metric extends beyond social media to Al companions and educational technology.
Al friends, whether embedded in social media or standalone products, are designed to maximize
engagement rather than quality of experience. Even ed-tech products face these perverse incentives. One
ed-tech company leader reported that integrating Al into their product nearly halved the time teachers
needed to generate administrative reports—a clear win for educators—yet faced board criticism for
declining user engagement. Seth Reynolds, an education leader at EY-Parthenon, argues that traditional
ed-tech success measures must be updated to include metrics that assess impact (Seth Reynolds,
personal communication, September 22, 2025). These might include alternative measures, including duty
of care approaches (discussed below) and digital well-being indicators (OECD 2021b).

ESTABLISH COMPREHENSIVE REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS FOR
EDUCATIONAL Al

I think if this technology goes wrong, it can go quite wrong. And we want to be vocal about that. We
want to work with the government to prevent that from happening.
— Sam Altman, Chief Executive Officer, OpenAl, 2023

As Al becomes integrated into education systems, education experts, teachers, and at times students
themselves advocate for regulatory frameworks ensuring that Al is implemented equitably, responsibly,
ethically, and in educationally valid ways. Such frameworks would align Al governance with existing legal
protections for student rights and privacy, allowing innovations to advance learning without undermining
fundamental safeguards.

Countries have different governmental structures and legal systems, requiring flexible regulatory
approaches. The following options offer both different examples of regulation as well as distinct
implementation mechanisms that can be adapted to various contexts.

To establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al, adopt a whole-of-government
approach to educational Al.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 155
Governments can embrace a whole-of-government approach that coordinates Al policy across sectors,
aligns multiple legislative frameworks, balances competing interests like innovation and regulation, and
manages complex cross-sectoral issues (Miao and Holmes 2023).

This comprehensive strategy can involve establishing a national body to lead cross-sectoral coordination
and align frameworks with existing legislation on data protection, Internet security, and citizen data
security while assessing whether current regulations require adaptation for Al-specific issues. It balances
regulation with innovation by promoting cooperation among companies, educational institutions, and
public agencies to develop trustworthy models, encouraging open-source ecosystems for sharing
computing resources and datasets, and fostering practical Al applications for public good.

This approach also establishes principles for assessing and categorizing Al efficacy, safety, and security
before deployment and throughout system life cycles, using risk-based classification mechanisms similar
to the European Union Artificial Intelligence Act (EU Al Act) that range from strict regulations banning
unacceptable-risk applications to general regulations for lower-risk systems (EU Artificial Intelligence
Act 2024). It mandates laws protecting users’ personal information and combating unlawful data storage,
profiling, and sharing, while enforcing age limits for Al applications primarily designed for adults, which
pose substantial risks to children including exposure to inappropriate content and manipulation (Miao and
Holmes 2023, 20-21).

| To establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al, require regulation by design.

Governments can require technology products to meet safe and ethical design standards through
regulation by design (RbD). RobD employs a more narrow focus than the whole-of-government approach
mentioned above. It integrates regulatory objectives directly into technical design specifications rather
than applying them through compliance checks (Mahari and Pataranutaporn 2025, 3). Al designers and
developers comply by translating legal requirements into technical elements embedded in system code,
pursuing goals that include promoting ethical Al use, student well-being, effective governance, accuracy,
transparency, legal protections, autonomy, justice, safety, security, and explainability for developers,
users, and society as a whole.

The European Union has pioneered RbD through the GDPR, resulting in technology companies doing
business in the EU designing products with stronger embedded privacy protections. While RbD faces
challenges including reduced individual autonomy, “consent fatigue,” and at times a lack of flexibility,

for student-facing Al applications, RbD can transform Al systems into inherently safer platforms by
shifting responsibility for safety directly to developers rather than to users (in the case of education,
educators, students, or parents) (Prifti et al. 2024). Embedding protections reduces reliance on after-the-
fact enforcement mechanisms while transforming safety compliance from an external constraint into an
intrinsic feature that can facilitate trust without impinging on innovation (Mahari and Pentland 2024).

To establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al, enact comprehensive
Al-specific legislation.

Governments can develop legislative frameworks that directly address Al to establish clear requirements
and accountability mechanisms that are distinct from broader regulatory coordination or design-level
interventions. The EU Al Act, mentioned previously and passed in 2024, provides a model of Al-specific
legislation countries can adopt. The Act sorts Al applications into four risk levels—minimal, limited, high,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 156
and unacceptable—with corresponding regulatory requirements. Under the EU Al Act, eight practices
threatening safety and rights are prohibited, including harmful manipulation, social scoring, and
unauthorized biometric recognition; furthermore, the act mandates conformity assessments for high-risk
systems and establishes oversight mechanisms to enforce compliance (European Commission 2025).
Such purpose-built legislation sets binding legal requirements from the outset instead of adapting existing
laws designed for pre-Al technologies.

To establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al, establish technical standards
and independent auditing requirements.

Rather than relying solely on prescriptive legislation or design mandates, governments can develop
minimum safety standards against which Al systems used in education are independently audited. In
the U.S., the National Institute of Standards and Technology, a federal agency within the Department
of Commerce that develops measurement, standards, and technology, could establish and oversee
such audits.

To ensure compliance with auditing standards, the federal government could employ various mechanisms
ranging from restrictive to incentive-based approaches, including prohibiting federal funding recipients
from purchasing unaudited Al systems, requiring audits as a condition for federal funding, providing
additional funding for districts that purchase audited systems, creating safe harbor legal protections

for compliant educational Al tools, withholding funds from school districts experiencing problems with
unaudited systems, or funding post-deployment audits (DiPaola et al. 2024, 5).

Each approach involves different trade-offs between enforcement of certainty and flexibility, but at a
minimum, education authorities can ensure that schools and the regional and district jurisdictions in which
they operate have access to audit standards, results, and information about their educational implications
to support informed procurement decisions.

| To establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al, employ “duty of care” laws.

A “duty of care” represents a legal and ethical obligation requiring individuals or organizations such

as schools to take reasonable steps to prevent foreseeable harm to students’ safety or well-being.
Governments can impose duty of care laws on technology companies so that student-facing products
are designed based on what is best for minors (defined as anyone under the age of 18) as opposed to
what is best for the technology company (Bernstein 2025). When governments impose duty of care laws
on technology companies, these mandates establish liability to ensure safety and exercise care in design
implementation. For minors, this obligation specifically addresses preventing harms, including compulsive
use, anxiety, depression, eating disorders, and predictable emotional harm (Bernstein 2023, 2025).

The UK pioneered this regulatory approach in 2020, asserting that technology companies had moral and
legal responsibility in terms of how their products affected minors (Department for Science, Innovation
and Technology et al. 2022; Haidt 2024). One example of an action incorporated under a duty of care
framework involves technology companies setting privacy protections set to the highest default standards
(Haidt 2024, 232-233). When applied to social media platforms, duty of care laws typically restrict data
collection and use practices, mandate these default privacy protections, and prohibit algorithms that push
harmful content to children.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 157
Duty of care frameworks are now expanding beyond social media and could be extended to Al
companion platforms (Bernstein 2025). Several U.S. states have already begun such implementation.
Vermont prohibits using personal data or designing products that result in predictable emotional harm or
compulsive use (State of Vermont 2025). North Carolina goes further by imposing a duty of loyalty that
specifically prevents Al bots from creating emotional dependence (Bernstein 2025).

To establish comprehensive regulatory frameworks for educational Al, update national data
sovereignty laws to protect user data.

Al companies have exploited weak data protection laws in low- and middle-income countries, extracting
valuable data resources while building trillion-dollar valuations (Dosunmu 2025). Concerned about one-
way flows of economic benefits to “hyperscalers"—companies that provide large-scale cloud computing,
networking, and data store—Global South governments can follow the examples of India, Nigeria, Vietnam,
and South Africa and update their data sovereignty laws to require local data storage and greater control
before permitting Al deployments or data center construction (Dosunmu 2025).

Data sovereignty enables nations to protect their citizens’ privacy, ensure security, and foster local digital
economies by controlling data generated within their borders. Unlike traditional Al solutions hosted on
hyperscaler platforms under foreign jurisdictions like the U.S. Clarifying Lawful Overseas Use of Data
(CLOUD) Act, sovereign Al keeps data within national borders for both storage and processing, eliminating
exposure risks through shared services (Broadcom 2025). This approach facilitates compliance with
frameworks like GDPR while enabling governments and education systems to select solutions matching
their specific requirements (Letort and Linask-Goode 2025).

Miao and Holmes (2023) advocate for stronger national data ownership frameworks that regulate Al
providers and prevent exclusive exploitation by tech companies, ensuring mutual benefit from citizen-
generated datasets used commercially. Supporting these data sovereignty principles, the Frequency
platform offers an open-source infrastructure built on the Decentralized Social Networking Protocol,

an open-source standard, which like HTML, is application agnostic. This platform enables all users to
control their data through portable digital identities, prioritizing consent and eliminating platform lock-in
(Frequency 2025; DSNP.org. 2025).

PROCURE TECHNOLOGY THAT PROTECTS STUDENTS’ PRIVACY, SAFETY,
AND SECURITY.

Large education systems wield significant influence over technology companies’ privacy practices through
their substantial purchasing power. They can leverage this influence for student privacy, safety, and security
by only purchasing platforms, tools, and systems that conform to data protection and privacy principles.

| To protect privacy, safety, and security, use child-friendly procurement criteria.

Schools can use child-friendly criteria, like those described in Box 30, to make procurement decisions.
Students can be empowered to support this procurement process. For example, within a school, a group
of students might be trained to read vendor privacy summaries and flag concerns in plain language.
These concerns can be assessed as the school makes final procurement decisions, ensuring student
involvement in procurement due diligence.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 158
Child-friendly procurement criteria

A growing number of education organizations and safety experts, most notably the Learning Accelerator
(2025), recommend that schools only purchase and use technology products that conform to the
following guidelines:

Privacy by default ensures that the strictest
privacy settings are automatically applied to users by default, requiring them to take action to reduce
their privacy protection (Newman 2021).

These controls direct Al on how to respond to a user
and “receive notifications when the system detects their teen is ina moment of acute distress.” While
far from perfect, such controls are an important step in ensuring student safety on online platforms
(Hill 2025).

Strict access controls and pricing can discourage or block Al “crawlers” from accessing
student portals, learning management systems, or platforms with student-generated content. This
gives institutions greater control over protecting student information from Al training datasets and
alerts them when Al systems attempt to access student content (Allen and Newton 2025).

that ensure that only data necessary for the
function of the platform are collected (Learning Accelerator 2025).

that outline how users’ personal data are collected, stored, shared,
and deleted. This can include clear plans for how to address data breaches, ensure that data are kept
no longer than needed for its intended purpose, and permanently delete student data when they are
no longer needed (Learning Accelerator 2025).

of student or teacher data and to delete that data when

appropriate (Learning Accelerator 2025).

to identify areas for improvement and adjustments
and to guide procurement. This can allow education systems to verify compliance with privacy and
security standards and ensure that educational technology vendors maintain data privacy practices
(Learning Accelerator 2025).

Education systems can access open-source libraries that allow
schools to easily add guardrails or technical controls to Al systems to protect student privacy, safety,
and well-being. For example, Hugging Face’s Chatbot Guardrails Arena stress-tests LLMs and privacy
guardrails to prevent sensitive data leaks. Nvidia built NeMo Guardrails, an open-source toolkit for
adding programmable guardrails to LLM applications. Guardrails Al offers similar open-source func-
tionality. LangChain provides a guardrails library on Github that helps organizations quickly integrate
guardrails into operations (McKinsey & Company 2024).

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

To protect privacy, safety, and security, incentivize technology companies through certification to
design products supporting the learning sciences and children’s well-bei

Education systems, governments, and families could all use their purchasing power to make child-
friendly certification of Al products meaningful. To do this, consumers need clear signals to identify
which products are optimized for children and meet child-safety standards. This can be accomplished by
certifying products as well as certifying product developers.

Product certifications

Anyone purchasing Al products and tools for education can use
some of the existing product certifications often run by nonprofits to guide their purchases. Consumers
(families, education systems, governments) can consult certifications (often run by nonprofits) and
criteria for Al products to help guide their choices. The table below includes a few examples of certifi-
cations, frameworks, guidelines, and criteria that can help schools purchase Al products that promote
students’ safety and well-being.

Digital Promise Responsibly Public privacy policy

(Digital Designed Al (product Public data security policy

Promise 2025) certification) Documentation of bias mitigation processes
Al-generated content is labeled
Allows educators/users to override Al decisions

National Vetting Al Resources: Human-centered approach
Education A Guide for Educators Evidence-based effectiveness
Association Ethical and transparent practices
(NEA 2025) Accessibility and equity
Professional development and support
Privacy, security, and accountability

Imagine Learning | Essential Al Tool Serves a legitimate instructional purpose
(Imagine Vetting Checklist Handles student data and privacy transparently
Learning 2025) for Educators and in compliance with regulations

Is equitable and free from harmful bias

Is accessible to all students

Has support and oversight processes in place

Aligns with instructional goals and complements
existing curriculum

Intentionally mitigates biases

Complies with best practices in security, ethics,
and data use

Allows human oversight

Proven to be effective

Is easily distributed and used

Southern Regional | Al Tool Procurement,
Education Board Implementation, and
(Southern Evaluation Checklist
Regional

Education

Board 2025)

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

Researchers and foundations can help support new certifications where gaps exist. For example, the
non-profit Common Sense Media's assessment of Al tools could be expanded to serve more families
and schools (Common Sense Media, n.d.).

Certifying products can be challenging when technology changes so rapidly.
But one way to improve the design of Al tools is to help the developers better understand children’s

learning. As one engineer in a technology company shared with researchers, “We know how technol-
ogy works, but we don’t know how kids work.” Technology companies that make products used by
children can require that their developers and designers be trained on child development, the science
of learning, and essential educational principles. Appropriate training can be developed in partnership
with researchers, universities, and governments; where relevant training exists, it can be adapted for
different use cases (LearnLab, n.d.).

| To protect privacy, safety, and security, adopt a no-regret approach.

“No regret” actions are strategic proactive decisions that yield risk management benefits regardless

of how future scenarios unfold. Education systems can borrow this approach from other fields that

have successfully employed it and implement pre-emptive measures to protect their technology and Al
systems. The potential upside of "no regret” approaches is significant while their downside is minimal
because they provide positive outcomes even when assumptions and fears do not materialize (Chorev and
Predd 2025). One example of a “no regret” action is a comprehensive audit of every technology vendor
and digital tool in an education system. Such action would reveal precisely what student data is collected,
how it is used, stored, and accessed. Such an audit would identify potential safety vulnerabilities, enable
informed decisionmaking, position schools for regulatory compliance, and respond more quickly to data
breaches or cyberattacks because they are responding from a position of knowledge versus ignorance.

12) SUPPORT FAMILIES TO MANAGE CHILDREN'S Al USE AT HOME

Families, civil society organizations, and children themselves have an important role to play in helping
children stay safe and healthy with their home technology use. At home, parents and caregivers face
the double burden of having to help their children learn and grow in both the physical and virtual worlds.
Many technology companies with student-facing products outsource a large share of the responsibility
for keeping children and youth safe to busy families. Today, some of the most prominent ways in which
caregivers are involved in the discussion on Al and children's well-being is from parents whose children
have been victims of online harm and abuse (Chatterjee 2025). In addition to technology companies
making safe products and governments enforcing safety standards, as discussed above, others can
play a role.

| To manage children's Al use at home, support students to inform families about Al use in schools.

Students themselves can communicate this information. For example, students may host quarterly forums
with the school community that explain what tools are in use, what data flows where, and how to opt out of
data sharing where possible. Education systems can prioritize this transparent sharing, including sending
basic information home and integrating it into regular family-facing communication.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 161
To manage children’s Al use at home, provide families and children with safety information.

Civil society organizations and associations that interface with and support families and children can all
play a role in sharing information on how to protect children from online harms. Groups such as parent
networks, student groups, pediatrician associations, religious leaders, and sports teams with coaches all
have a role to play. There are a wide range of family- and student-facing materials that include things like
protecting children's data, spotting deep fakes, avoiding cyber bullying and sexual exploitation, treating
gaming and shopping addition, limiting exposure to violence and graphic content, and being aware of
extortion tactics with Al (see Box 32).

| BOX 32)
Family-facing Al safety information

Examples of Al safety material for parents

Parents’ Ultimate Guide to Generative Al

Common Sense Media explains how Al works, how teenagers are using it, and its key risks and bene-
fits; the guide offers parents practical advice for talking with children and youth and guiding safe use
(Common Sense Media 2024).

The Safe Al for Children Alliance: A Comprehensive Guide to Al Risks to Children

The Safe Al for Children Alliance explains the various risks that Al poses to children—from exposure
to harmful content, data exploitation, and online grooming to psychological effects, algorithmic bias,
and long-term existential threats—and presents a call for urgent action by parents, educators, policy-
makers, and society to protect and prepare the next generation (Safe Al for Children 2024).

A Guide to Cyber Safety for Kids at Every Age

The Singapore government provides parents with clear explanations and checklists of how to help
keep children safe in an online world, including privacy settings, discussions to have with children,
and behavior shifts parents themselves can make (Infocomm Media Development Authority 2025).

Artificial Intelligence for Children: Toolkit
The World Economic Forum informs parents and guardians about key factors to consider when purchas-
ing Al-powered products to help them make safe and informed choices (World Economic Forum 2022).

Guide for Parents
HP Mexico explains how Al can enhance children’s learning through personalized interactive tools while
emphasizing the crucial role of parents in balancing technology use with supervision and age-appro-
priate guidance (HP 2025).

To manage children’s Al use at home, limit screen time, including Al use.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
Families and students can talk about screen time and the trade-offs that come with extensive screen
time use such as in-person connection, exercise, and sleep. They can engage children in conversations
to discuss why Al friends and LLMs are not actually children's companions like their in-person friends.
Together, caregivers and children can develop a plan for limiting screen time at home and review the
content of children’s online interactions. And because parents and caregivers are children’s primary
educator in life, parents and caregivers can model healthy, responsible technology use.

To manage children’s Al use at home, students can talk with peers.

Students can talk with their peers about what seem to be good and bad uses of Al. They can support each
other in balancing real and online world time and interactions, as well as join student-led organizations and
networks that focus on how to lead healthy and safe lives in an online world. Students can join existing
youth advocacy groups or start their own if they cannot find one in their community.

| BOX 33 |
Student led, peer-to-peer Al discussion

Student Groups Addressing Al Safety

Design It For Us 2025 Al Policy Platform

Design It For Us is a youth-led organization that aims to ensure that artificial intelligence systems
are developed and governed with safety, transparency, meaningful youth participation, educational
preparedness, and human-centered labor policies so that young people's rights and well-being are
protected in the Al era (Design It For Us 2025).

Youth in Al

Youth in Al is a youth-led nonprofit based in Africa that empowers young people to become creators,
researchers, and ethical leaders in Al by offering education, mentorship, innovation labs, and com-
munity building across more than 15 African countries (Youth in Al 2025).

Conclusion: Navigating the crossroads

The arc of Al is far from complete. As a relatively new technology, the speed and scale of its reach and
effects are disorienting, hard to predict, and difficult to fully recognize—and we are all still learning about
Al. None of us have all the answers right now.

And yet the stakes to get Al right for our children could not be higher.

As this report has emphasized we can already recognize Al's potential benefits on children’s learning, but
we also see its risks. Without deliberate interventions by all of us—technology companies, governments,
educators, families, researchers, education leaders, and students—the potential harms of Al in education
risk undercutting its benefits.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT
These risks emerge from human choices rather than technological inevitability. They stem from failing
to view equity as requisite for quality, lacking guidelines for Al in education, excluding educators

from product development, and prioritizing engagement over student well-being. Without immediate
intervention, we risk creating students who trade deep understanding for surface efficiency, critical
thinking for algorithmic dependence, human companionship for Al relationships, and creative problem-
solving for rapid task completion.

Our three-pillar framework—Prosper, Prepare, and Protect—ensures that Al promotes educational
excellence, enriches rather than diminishes student learning, and maintains the human-centered focus
critical to meaningful education. While discrete, these pillars are essential and interconnected, depending
on collective action. As we've argued, education systems can implement thoughtful Al rollout plans
aligned with educational objectives. Technology companies can develop ethical tools that support human
relationships. Governments can establish flexible guidelines safeguarding student welfare and academic
integrity. Families, educators, students, and civil society can model productive Al use while empowering
active creation over passive consumption.

We are living in the age of Al. This is the world our children and their children will inhabit, and it will

likely impact every facet of their lives. Through coordinated action and unwavering focus on children's
development, as we have argued here, we can ensure that this world remains one centered on the needs
and aspirations of human beings not algorithms — amplifying rather than replacing human potential,
serving rather than substituting for understanding, and preparing every generation to prosper and thrive
with these powerful generative tools.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 164
ENDNOTES

1 For example, rule-based systems follow
predetermined logic, machine learning models
identify patterns from data, and generative Al
creates novel content through complex neural
networks trained on large data sets (Bergmann
2025).

2 Throughout the remainder of this report, the
data presented (typically as percentages)
refers to the proportion of participants within
each group who mentioned each theme.

To ensure equal weight was given to each
person's voice regardless of how frequently
they raised particular concerns, percentages
were calculated by dividing the number of
participants who mentioned each theme
(numerator) by the total number of participants
in that group (denominator). This provides a
measure of consensus within each stakeholder
group rather than simply the volume of
comments.

3 A/B testing is a controlled randomized test that
compares two versions of a digital product
or service to determine which performs
better. It involves splitting a live audience
into two groups, with one group (the control)
using version A and the other (the treatment)
using version B. By measuring key metrics,
technology companies can use data to make

decisions about design changes, offers, or user

experiences.

4 There does seem to be some flexibility in this
principle that makes it more compatible with Al
practices. For example, Al companies may be
allowed to reuse personal data for purposes
aligned with those originally communicated or
for statistical purposes, assuming there are no

“unacceptable risks for the data subject” (Sartor

and Lagioia 2020).

5 The percent of the population to speak
each language was calculated by dividing
Ethnologue's 2025 data on the number of
speakers (native or second language) of each
language by the United Nations Population
Divisions’ 2025 estimate for total world
population.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 165
REFERENCES

EdTech. 2025. “About 1EdTech.” 1EdTech, October
26. https://www.ledtech.org/about/ledtech.

5Rights Foundation. 2025. “Children and Al Design
Code: A Protocol for the Development and Use of Al
Systems That Impact Children.” 5Rights Foundation.
https://5rightsfoundation.com/wp-content/
uploads/2025/03/Srights_Al_CODE_DIGITAL.pdf.

Abbas, Muhammad, Farooq Ahmed Jam, and
Tariq Iqbal Khan. 2024. “Is It Harmful or Helpful?
Examining the Causes and Consequences of
Generative Al Usage among University Students.”
International Journal of Educational Technology
in Higher Education 21 (10). https://doi.org/10.1186/
$41239-024-00444-7.

Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL).
2024. “Artificial Intelligence to Strengthen High
School Students’ Writing Skills.”
https://www.povertyactionlab.org/case-study/
artificial-intelligence-strengthen-high-school-stu-
dents-writing-skills.

Acar, Oguz A., Phyliss Jia Gai, Yanping Tu, and Jiayi
Hou. 2025. “Research: The Hidden Penalty of Using
Al at Work." Harvard Business Review, August 1.
https://hbr.org/2025/08/research-the-hidden-pen-
alty-of-using-ai-at-work.

Adam, David. 2025. “Supportive? Addictive?
Abusive? How Al Companions Affect Our Mental
Health.” Nature, May 6. https://www.nature.com/
articles/d41586-025-01349-9.

Adams, Kirkwood, and Maria G Baker. 2025.
“Characterizing ChatGPT's Feedback for FYW:
Analyzing Feedback Responses to Inquiry-Driven
Essays.” Thresholds in Education 48 (2): 159-181.

Ademokun, Oluwatosin Victoria. 2025. “Al and
the GDPR: Understanding the Foundations of
Compliance." TechGDPR (blog), June 4.

https://techgdpr.com/blog/ai-and-the-gdpr-under-
standing-the-foundations-of-compliance/.

Ahuja, Manoj, Joseph Emmanuel, Biswajit Saha, et
al. n.d. "Artificial Intelligence Integration for School
Curriculum.” CBSE Academic. Accessed December
2, 2025. https://cbseacademic.nic.in/web_material/
Curriculum20/AI_Integration_Manual_Introduction.
pdf.

Akiba, Motoko, Gerald K. LeTendre, and Jay P.
Scribner. 2007. "Teacher Quality, Opportunity
Gap, and National Achievement in 46 Countries.”
Educational Researcher 36 (7): 369-87.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X07308739.

Alazemi, Asmaa Falah Theiyab. 2024. “Formative
Assessment in Artificial Integrated Instruction:
Delving into the Effects on Reading Comprehension
Progress, Online Academic Enjoyment, Personal
Best Goals, and Academic Mindfulness.” Language
Testing in Asia 14 (44). https://doi.org/10.186/
s40468-024-00319-8.

Alexander, Robin. 2018. “Developing Dialogic
Teaching: Genesis, Process, Trial." Research
Papers in Education 33 (5): 561-98.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02671522.2018.1481140.

Ali, Fayaz, Qingyu Zhang, Muhammad Zubair Tauni,
and Khuram Shahzad. 2024. “Social Chatbot: My
Friend in My Distress." International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction 40 (7): 1702-12.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2022.2150745.

Ali, Jamal Kaid Mohammed, Muayad Abdulhalim
Ahmad Shamsan, Taha Ahmed Hezam, and Ahmed
Majeed. 2023. "Impact of ChatGPT on Learning
Motivation: Teachers and Students’ Voices.”
Journal of English Studies in Arabia Felix 2 (1):
41-49. https://doi.org/10.56540/jesaf.v2i1.51.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

166
Allen, Will, and Simon Newton. 2025. “Introducing
Pay per Crawl: Enabling Content Owners to Charge
Al Crawlers for Access." The Cloudflare Blog,

July 1. https://blog.cloudflare.com/introducing-pay-
per-crawl/.

American Psychological Association. 2018. “APA
Dictionary of Psychology.” American Psychological
Association. https://dictionary.apa.org/cognitive-
development.

American Psychological Association. 2025a.
“Artificial Intelligence and Adolescent Well-Being.”
American Psychological Association. https://www.
apa.org/topics/artificial-intelligence-machine-learn-
ing/health-advisory-ai-adolescent-well-being.

American Psychological Association. 2025b.
“Misinformation and Disinformation.”

American Psychological Association.
https://www.apa.org/topics/journalism-facts/misin-
formation-disinformation.

Anderson, Jenny. 2025. “Parents Are Torn about

Al in Schools. Here's a Tool That Might Really Help
Kids Learn." How to Be Brave (blog), November 26.
https://howtobebrave.substack.com/p/parents-are-
torn-about-ai-in-schools.

Anderson, Jenny, and Rebecca Winthrop. 2025.
The Disengaged Teen: Helping Kids Learn Better,
Feel Better, and Live Better. Penguin Random
House.

Anderson, Monica. 2024. “Americans' View of
Technology Companies.” Pew Research Center,
April 29. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/
2024/04/29/americans-views-of-technology-com-
panies-2/.

Ang, Shermaine. 2024. “Students Are Taught to Use
Al Ethically and Responsibly at Different Levels:
Chan Chun Sing.” The Straits Times, January 10.
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/politics/
students-are-taught-to-use-ai-ethically-and-re-
sponsibly-at-different-levels-chan-chun-sing.

ANI News. 2022. "'FotonVR' Makes Headway
towards Going Global!” ANI News. https://www.
aninews.in/news/business/business/fotonvr-makes-
headway-towards-going-global20221124202344/.

Anthropic. 2025. “Tracing the Thoughts of a Large
Language Model.” Anthropic, March 27. https://
www.anthropic.com/research/tracing-thoughts-lan-
guage-model.

Apple, Sam. 2025. "My Couples Retreat With 3

Al Chatbots and the Humans Who Love Them.”
Wired, June 26. https://www.wired.com/story/
couples-retreat-with-3-ai-chatbots-and-humans-
who-love-them-replika-nomi-chatgpt/.

Arias-Sarah, Pablo, Daniel Bedoya, Christoph
Daube, Jean-Julien Aucouturier, Lars Hall, and
Petter Johansson. 2024. “Aligning the Smiles

of Dating Dyads Causally Increases Attraction.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
121 (45): e2400369121. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2400369121.

Arifin, Kasman, Muhammad Sirih, Asmawati

Munir, Jahidin Jahidin, and Murni Sabilu. 2024.
“The Influence of Multimodal Learning Strategies
on Prospective Biology Teachers’ Literacy-
Numeracy Learning Outcomes." Eurasia Journal of
Mathematics, Science and Technology Education
21 (1): em2563. https://doi.org/10.29333/ejm-
ste/15802.

Asian College of Teachers. 2025. “China man-
dates Al literacy: global impacts and lessons

for school leaders.” Asian College of Teachers,
August 1. https://www.teacherstrainingchina.com/
blog/367-China-Mandates-Al-Literacy-Global-Im-
pacts-and-Lessons-for-School-Leaders-blog.php.

Australian Government Department of Education.
2025. China's Approach to Al Education in
Schools (Year 1-12). https://www.education.gov.
au/download/19495/chinas-approach-ai-edu-
cation-primary-and-secondary-schools/41945/
document/pdf.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

167
Australian Government e-Safety Commisioner.
2025. "Safety by Design.” eSafety Commissioner.
https://www.esafety.gov.au/industry/safety-by-de-
sign.

Avelar, Marina, Arushi Terway, Marina Dreux Frotte,
and NORRAG. 2020. Innovative Financing For
Education: A Systematic Literature Review. No. 11.
NORRAG. https://resources.norrageducation.org/
resource/595/innovative-financing-for-educa-
tion-a-systematic-literature-review.

Ayers, John W., Adam Poliak, Mark Dredze, et

al. 2023. "Comparing Physician and Artificial
Intelligence Chatbot Responses to Patient
Questions Posted to a Public Social Media Forum.”
JAMA Internal Medicine 183 (6): 589-96.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2023.1838.

Bai, Jing, Heqing Huang, and Huahong Ouyang.
2022. “Effects of Group-Play Moderate to

Vigorous Intensity Physical Activity Intervention on
Executive Function and Motor Skills in 4- to 5-Year-
Old Preschoolers: A Pilot Cluster Randomized
Controlled Trial.” Frontiers in Psychology 13 (June).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.847785.

Bainbridge, Lisanne. 1983. “Ironies of Automation.”
Automatica 19 (6): 775-779. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0005-1098(83)90046-8.

Bakir, Vian, and Andrew McStay. 2025. “Move Fast
and Break People? Ethics, Companion Apps, and
the Case of Character.ai.” Social Science Research

Network Scholarly Paper No. 5159928. February 28.

https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5159928.

Bali, Maha. 2024. “Different Critiques of Al in
Education.” Reflecting Allowed (blog), December
22. https://blog.mahabali.me/educational-technol-
ogy-2/different-critiques-of-ai-in-education/.

Barrett, Alex, and Austin Pack. 2023. “Not Quite
Eye to A.l.: Student and Teacher Perspectives
on the Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence
in the Writing Process." International Journal of
Educational Technology in Higher Education 20

(November): 59. https://doi.org/10.186/s41239-
023-00427-0.

Bastani, Hamsa, Osbert Bastani, Alp Sungu,
Haosen Ge, Ozge Kabakcl, and Rei Mariman. 2024.
“Generative Al Can Harm Learning." Social Science
Research Network Scholarly Paper No. 4895486.
July 15. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4895486.

Bergmann, Dave. 2025. “What Is Machine
Learning?” IBM, August 18. https://www.ibm.com/
think/topics/machine-learning.

Bernstein, Gaia. 2022. “A Window of Opportunity
to Regulate Addictive Technologies.” Wisconsin
Law Review 2022 (Online): 64-84. https://wir.law.
wisc.edu/a-window-of-opportunity-to-regulate-ad-
dictive-technologies/.

Bernstein, Gaia. 2023. Unwired. Cambridge
University Press.

Bernstein, Gaia. 2025. “We Are Rushing into the
Same Mistakes We Made with Social Media.” After
Babel (blog), August 20. https://www.afterbabel.
com/p/dont-repeat-social-media-mistakes.

Birhane, Abeba, Vinay Prabhu, Sang Han, and
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. 2023. “On Hate Scaling
Laws for Data-Swamps.” Preprint, arXiv:2306.13141,
June 28, 2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2306.13141.

Blikstein, Paulo, and Marcelo Worsley. 2016.
“Multimodal Learning Analytics and Education
Data Mining: Using Computational Technologies
to Measure Complex Learning Tasks.” Journal
of Learning Analytics 3 (2): 220-38. https://doi.
org/10.18608/jla.2016.32.11.

Bloom, Benjamin S. 1984. "The 2 Sigma
Problem: The Search for Methods of Group
Instruction as Effective as One-to-One Tutoring.”
Educational Researcher 13 (6): 4-16. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0013189X013006004.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

168
Bloom, Benjamin S., Max D. Engelhart, Edward
J. Furst, Walker H. Hill, and David R. Krathwohl.
1956. Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The
Classification of Educational Goals. Longmans,
Green and Co. Ltd.

Bodrova, Elena, and Deborah Leong. 2007. Tools
of the Mind: The Vygotskian Approach to Early
Childhood Education. 2nd ed. Pearson/Merrill
Prentice Hall.

Botti-Lodovico, Yolanda. 2025. “Shabana
Basij-Rasikh and Mati Amin Believe That

Al Can Help Restore the Right to Education

for Afghan Girls." Patrick J. McGovern

Foundation (blog), July 15. https://medium.com/
patrick-j-mcgovern-foundation/shabana-basij-
rasikh-and-mati-amin-believe-that-ai-can-help-re-
store-the-right-to-education-for-75ef744ca308.

Boulay, Benedict du. 2016. “Artificial Intelligence as
an Effective Classroom Assistant." [EEE Intelligent
Systems 31 (6): 76-81. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MIS.2016.93.

Bozkurt, Aras, Junhong Xiao, Robert Farrow, et al.
2024. "The Manifesto for Teaching and Learning
in a Time of Generative Al: A Critical Collective
Stance to Better Navigate the Future.” Open Praxis
16 (4): 487-513. https://doi.org/10.55982/open-
praxis.16.4.777.

Bracewell. 2025. “Powering Africa's Digital
Future: The Challenge of Energy for Data
Center Development.” Bracewell LLP, April

16. https://www.bracewell.com/resources/
powering-africas-digital-future-the-chal-
lenge-of-energy-for-data-center-development/.

British Dyslexia Association. 2025. “Dyslexia
Factsheet.” British Dyslexia Association, September
10. https://www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/resources.

Broadcom. 2025. “The Future of Al Is Sovereign:
Why Data Sovereignty Is the Key to Al Innovation.”
Broadcom News and Stories, July 28. https://news.
broadcom.com/sovereign-cloud/the-future-of-

ai-is-sovereign-why-data-sovereignty-is-the-key-
to-ai-innovation.

Bronfenbrenner, Urie. 1994. “Ecological Modes
of Human Development." Vol. 3 of International
Encyclopedia of Education. 2nd ed. Elsevier.
https://www.ncj.nl/wp-content/uploads/
media-import/docs/6a45c1a4-82ad-4f69-957e-
1c76966678e2.pdf.

Bryan, Claire, and Sharon Lurye. 2025. “Schools
Use Al to Monitor Kids, Hoping to Prevent
Violence. Our Investigation Found Security Risks.”
AP News, March 12. https://apnews.com/article/
ai-school-chromebook-gaggle-goguardian-se-
curly-25a3946727397951fd42324139aaf70f.

Bryk, Anthony S., and Barbara Schneider. 2002.
Trust in Schools: A Core Resource for Improvement.
Russell Sage Foundation. https://www.jstor.org/sta-
ble/10.7758/9781610440967.

Bucinca, Zana, Maja Barbara Malaya, and Krzysztof
Z. Gajos. 2021. "To Trust or to Think: Cognitive
Forcing Functions Can Reduce Overreliance on

Al in Al-Assisted Decision-Making." Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5
(CSCW1): 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449287.

Buckley, Jack, Mario Piacentini, and Alina von
Davier. 2021. “Towards a New Generation of
Assessment." Presented at the OECD Centre
for Educational Research and Innovation
conference, Digital education for a strong recov-
ery: A forward look, June 9. https://www.
oecd-events.org/digital-education/session/6f-
dc3bb9-79ae-eb11-94b3-501ac5921410/
towards-a-new-generation-of-assessment.

Budiyono, Herman, Marzuki, Wiwek Pudjaningsih,
Bambang Prastio, and Ahsani Maulidina. 2025.
“Exploring Long-Term Impact of Al Writing Tools

on Independent Writing Skills: A Case Study

of Indonesian Language Education Students.”
International Journal of Information and Education
Technology 15 (5): 1003-13. https://doi.org/10.18178/
ijiet.2025.15.5.2306.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

169
Burgess, Matt. 2025. “A Single Poisoned Document
Could Leak ‘Secret’ Data Via ChatGPT.” Wired,
August 6. https://www.wired.com/story/poisoned-
document-could-leak-secret-data-chatgpt/.

Burgess, Matt, and Natasha Bernal. 2025. “Chatbots
Are Pushing Sanctioned Russian Propaganda."
WIRED, October 27. https://www.wired.com/story/
chatbots-are-pushing-sanctioned-russian-propa-
ganda/.

Burns, Mary. 2020. “From Theory to Use:

Making Research More Usable and Useful for
Educational Practitioners.” In Annual Review of
Comparative and International Education 2019,
edited by Alexander W. Wiseman, vol. 39. Emerald
Publishing Limited. https://doi.org/10.1108/S1479-
367920200000039007.

Burns, Mary. 2021. Background Paper Prepared
for the Global Education Monitoring Report:
Technology and Education. UNESCO.
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000378951/P DF/378951eng.pdf.multi.

Burns, Mary. 2023a. “Barriers and Supports for
Technology Integration: Views from Teachers.”
UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000386070.

Burns, Mary. 2023b. Distance Education for
Teacher Training: Modes, Models, and Methods.
2nd ed. Education Development Center, Inc.
https://www.edc.org/sites/default/files/uploads/
EDC-Distance-Education-Teacher-Training.pdf.

Burns, Mary. 2024. “Eyes Wide Open: What

We Lose from Generative Artificial Intelligence

in Education.” In What Education Demands

of Us Today or in the Future. The University

of Lisbon. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/385001882_Eyes_Wide_Open_What_
We_Lose_from_Generative_Artificial_Intelligence_in_
Education_1.

Burns, Mary, and Petra Wiyakti Bodrogini.
2011. ‘The Wisdom of Practice’: Web 2.0 as

a Cognitive and Community-Building Tool in
Indonesia." In Digital Education: Opportunities
for Social Collaboration, edited by Michael
Thomas. Palgrave Macmillan US. https://doi.
org/10.1057/9780230118003_9.

Burns, Mary, and Mohammad Issack Santally. 2019.
Information and Communications Technologies

in Secondary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa:
Policies, Practices, Trends and Recommendations.
Mastercard Foundation, November 19. https://cdn.
buttercms.com/vq95NZFyQ7y6a6lAa8zk.

Burns, Mary, and Rebecca Winthrop. 2025.
“Imagining Failure to Attain Success: The Art and
Science of Pre-Mortems." Brookings Institution,
August 21. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-
art-and-science-of-pre-mortems/.

Cai, Alice, lan Arawjo, and Elena L. Glassman. 2024.
“Antagonistic Al.” Preprint, arXxiv:2402.07350,
February 12, 2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2402.07350.

California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018, Title

1.81. https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/
codes_displayText.xhtml?division=3.&part=4.&law-
Code=ClV&title=1.81.5.

Caltrider, Jen, Misha Rykov, and Zoé MacDonald.
2024. "Romantic Al Chatbots Don't Have

Your Privacy at Heart." Mozilla Foundation,
February 14. https://www.mozillafounda-
tion.org/en/privacynotincluded/articles/
happy-valentines-day-romantic-ai-chatbots-dont-
have-your-privacy-at-heart/.

Cambium Learning Group. 2024. "Cambium
Learning Survey Uncovers How K-12 Teachers
and Administrators Are Using Al Right Now

and How It Is Shaping the Future of Education.”
Cambium Learning Group, August 6. https://www.
cambiumlearning.com/about-us/news/6062/cam-
bium-learning-survey-uncovers-how-k-12-teach-
ers-and-administrators-are-using-a.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

170
Capdehourat, German, Maria Eugenia Curi, Victor
Koleszar, and Brian Lorenzo. 2024. Marco referen-
cial para la ensenhanza de Ia inteligencia artificial.
Ceibal. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Kly7ZkCN-
WEcI32Im5056milY DfL4kHes/view.

Carey, Bridget. 2024. "The First Al-Powered
Storytelling Teddy Bear Is Here. | Gave It

to My Kids to Test.” CNET, July 15. https://
www.cnet.com/tech/services-and-software/
the-first-ai-powered-storytelling-teddy-bear-is-
here-i-gave-it-to-my-kids-to-test/.

Carr, David F. 2023. “ChatGPT Is More Famous, but
Character.Al Wins on Engagement.” Similarweb,
March 23. https://www.similarweb.com/blog/
insights/ai-news/character-ai-engagement/.

Carr, Nicholas. 2010. The Shallows. W. W. Norton &
Company.

Carr, Nicholas. 2025. Superbloom: How
Technologies of Connection Tear Us Apart. W. W.
Norton & Company.

CAST. n.d. The Benefits of Universal Design for
Learning. Last accessed December 14, 2025.
https://www.cast.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/04/
UDL-Benefits-Evidence-ATly.pdf.

CBSE (Central Board of Secondary Education).
2024. "Skill Education—Books and Support
Material.” CBSE. https://cbseacademic.nic.in/
skill-education-books.html.

Celik, Ismail, Muhterem Dindar, Hanni Muukkonen,
and Sanna Jarvela. 2022. “The Promises and
Challenges of Artificial Intelligence for Teachers:
A Systematic Review of Research.” TechTrends 66
(March): 616-30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-
022-00715-y.

Center for Digital Thriving. 2025. "Ten Fresh
Insights on Generative Al from Our Teen Advisors.”
Harvard Graduate School for Education Center for
Digital Thriving. https://digitalthriving.gse.harvard.

edu/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CDT_Youth-
Advisory-Insights_Gen-Al-Memo.pdf.

Center for Humane Technology. 2025. "The CHT
Perspective.” Center for Humane Technology,
October 26. https://www.humanetech.com/
the-cht-perspective.

Center for Internet Security. 2025. 2025 CIS
MS-ISAC K-12 Cybersecurity Report: Where
Education Meets Community Resilience.
https://www.cisecurity.org/insights/white-pa-
pers/2025-k12-cybersecurity-report.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2024.
“About Emotional Well-Being." CDC, May 15.
https://www.cdc.gov/emotional-well-being/about/
index.html.

Central Square Foundation. 2025. "Al Samarth."
Central Square Foundation, September 2.
https://www.aisamarth.centralsquarefoundation.
org/.

Centre for Evidence and Implementation (CEI).
2025. “Investigating Parent Views on Teen Use of
Generative Al." CEI, September 13. https://www.
ceiglobal.org/work-and-insights/investigating-par-
ent-views-teen-use-generative-ai.

Chango, Wilson, Rebeca Cerezo, Miguel Sanchez-
Santillan, Roger Azevedo, and Cristobal Romero.
2021. “Improving Prediction of Students’
Performance in Intelligent Tutoring Systems Using
Attribute Selection and Ensembles of Different
Multimodal Data Sources." Journal of Computing
in Higher Education 33 (3): 614-34. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12528-021-09298-8.

Character.ai. 2024. “Optimizing Al Inference at
Character.Al.” Character.ai (blog), June 20.
https://blog.character.ai/optimizing-ai-infer-
ence-at-character-ai/.

Chatterjee, Rhitu. 2025. “Their Teenage Sons Died
by Suicide. Now, They Are Sounding an Alarm about
Al Chatbots.” NPR, September 19. https://www.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

171
npr.org/sections/shots-health-news/2025/09/19/
nx-s1-5545749/ai-chatbots-safety-openai-me-
ta-characterai-teens-suicide.

Chaturvedi, Rijul, Sanjeev Verma, Ronnie Das, and
Yogesh K. Dwivedi. 2023. “Social Companionship
with Artificial Intelligence: Recent Trends and
Future Avenues.” Technological Forecasting and
Social Change 193 (August): 122634. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.122634.

Chen, Bodong, Jiayu Cheng, Chen Wang, and
Vivian Leung. 2025. “Pedagogical Biases in
Al-Powered Educational Tools: The Case of Lesson
Plan Generators.” Social Innovations Journal 30
(2025). https://socialinnovationsjournal.com/index.
php/sij/article/view/10004/8134.

Child Welfare League Foundation (CWLF).

2025. "CWLF Survey: 58% of Teens Use Al for
Schoolwork, but 60% Rarely Verify Accuracy

or Safeguard Privacy.” Child Welfare League
Foundation, September 24. https://www.children.
org.tw/english/news_detail/2025-survey-online-
safety.

Chorev, Matan, and Joel Predd. 2025. "America
Should Assume the Worst About Al.” Foreign
Affairs, July 22. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
united-states/artificial-intelligence-geopoli-
tics-worst-about-ai.

Chow, Andrew R., and Angela Haupt. 2025.
“What Happened When a Doctor Posed as a
Teen for Al Therapy.” TIME, June 12. https://time.
com/7291048/ai-chatbot-therapy-kids/.

Chowdhury, Sanjana. 2024. “Meet India’s

Very First Al Humanoid Robot Teacher—Gone
Viral." Asian College of Teachers (blog), July

10. https://www.asiancollegeofteachers.com/
blogs/1981-Meet-Indias-Very-First-Al-Humanoid-
Robot-Teacher---Gone-Viral-blog.php.

Clun, Rachel. 2025. "Afghan Women Make Do
with Al Friends ‘to Give Yourself Fake Hope’ under
Taliban Rule." The Independent, March 7.

https://www.the-independent.com/asia/south-asia/
afghanistan-women-ai-taliban-internation-
al-b2710878.html.

Cobing, Laura. 2025. “Al-Powered eLearning
Assessments: Adaptive, Gamified, and Data-
Driven.” Mindsmith (blog), March 17. https://www.
mindsmith.ai/blog/ai-powered-elearning-assess-
ments-adaptive-gamified-and-data-driven.

Code.org. 2025. “Free K-12 Curriculum for
Computer Science and Al | Code.Org.” October 26.
https://code.org/en-US.

Code.org, CoSN, Digital Promise, European EdTech
Alliance, J. Larimore, and PACE. 2025. Al Guidance
for Schools Toolkit. TeachAl. https://www.teachai.
org/toolkit.

Cohen, David K., and Deborah Loewenberg Ball.
1999. Instruction, Capacity, and Improvement.
Consortium for Policy Research in Education
(CPRE) Publications, Philadelphia, PA.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED 431749.

Cohen, Geoffrey. 2022. “Understanding and
Overcoming Belonging Uncertainty.” Behavioral
Scientist, October 10. https://behavioralscientist.
org/understanding-and-overcoming-belonging-un-
certainty/.

Collins, Katie. 2025. “Online Age Verification
Rules Are Popping Up Everywhere. Here's What
You Need to Know.” CNET, August 27. https://
www.cnet.com/tech/services-and-software/
online-age-verification-rules-are-popping-up-ev-
erywhere-heres-what-you-need-to-know/.

Common Sense Media. 2024. “Parents’ Ultimate
Guide to Generative Al.” Common Sense Media,
September 17. https://www.commonsensemedia.
org/articles/parents-ultimate-guide-to-genera-
tive-ai.

Common Sense Media. 2025a. “CSM Al Risk
Assessment: Social Al Companions.” Common
Sense Media, April 10. https://www.com-

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

172
monsensemedia.org/sites/default/files/pug/
csm-ai-risk-assessment-social-ai-companions_
final.pdf.

Common Sense Media. 2025b. “Our Al Initiatives.”
Common Sense Media, November 21. https://www.
commonsensemedia.org/ai.

Conner, Jerusha O., and Denise C. Pope. 2013. "Not
Just Robo-Students: Why Full Engagement Matters
and How Schools Can Promote It." Journal of Youth
and Adolescence 42 (9): 1426-42.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-013-9948-y.

Consortium for School Networking (CoSN). 2025.
“COSN Releases 2025 State of EdTech District
Leadership Report." CoSN, May 6. https://www.
cosn.org/cosn-news/cosn-releases-2025-state-of-
edtech-district-leadership-report/.

Costello, John M. 2000. “AAC Intervention in
the Intensive Care Unit: The Children's Hospital
Boston Model.” Augmentative and Alternative
Communication 16 (September): 137-52.

Council of Writing Program Administrators, National
Council of Teachers of English, and National
Writing Project (CWPA, NCTE, and NWP). 2011.
Framework for Success in Postsecondary Writing.
https://wpacouncil.org/aws/CWPA/asset_manager/
get_file/350201.

Cox Mobile. 2025. Online Habits and Safety
Concerns Across Three Generations. Cox Mobile.
https://www.coxmobilesafety.com/2025/cox-mo-
bile-online-safety-survey-infographictips.pdf.

Cruz-Jesus, Frederico, Mauro Castelli, Tiago
Oliveira, et al. 2020. "Using Artificial Intelligence
Methods to Assess Academic Achievement in
Public High Schools of a European Union Country.”
Heliyon 6 (6): e04081. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heli-
yon.2020.e04081.

Cukurova, Mutlu. 2024. "The Interplay of Learning,
Analytics and Artificial Intelligence in Education: A
Vision for Hybrid Intelligence." British Journal of

Educational Technology 56 (2): 469-88.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13514.

Curriculum Associates. 2025. “Al Labs.” Curriculum
Associates, October 3. https://www.curriculumas-
sociates.com/about/ailabs.

Darling-Hammond, Linda, Lisa Flook, Channa
Cook-Harvey, Brigid Barron, and David Osher.
2020. “Implications for Educational Practice of the
Science of Learning and Development." Applied
Developmental Science 24 (2): 97-140.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10888691.2018.1537791.

Darvishi, Ali, Hassan Khosravi, Shazia Sadiq,
Dragan GaSevic, and George Siemens. 2024.
“Impact of Al Assistance on Student Agency.”
Computers & Education 210 (March): 104967.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2023.104967.

Day of Al. 2025. “Home.” Day of Al, October 6.
https://dayofai.org/.

Deci, Edward L., and Richard M. Ryan. 2008. “Self-
Determination Theory: A Macrotheory of Human
Motivation, Development, and Health.” Canadian
Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne 49 (3):
182-85.

Deibert, Ronald, John Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and
Jonathan L. Zittrain. 2010. Access Controlled: The
Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace.
MIT Press. https://direct.mit.edu/books/
oa-edited-volume/1872/Access-ControlledThe-
Shaping-of-Power-Rights-and.

Dell‘Acqua, Fabrizio, Edward McFowland, Ethan

R. Mollick, et al. 2023. “Navigating the Jagged
Technological Frontier: Field Experimental
Evidence of the Effects of Al on Knowledge Worker
Productivity and Quality.” Harvard Business School
Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working

Paper No. 24-013, The Wharton School Research
Paper. September 27. https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.4573321.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

173
Delors, Jacques, ed. 1998. Learning the Treasure
Within. Report to UNESCO of the International
Commission on Education for the Twenty-First
Century. 2nd ed. UNESCO Publishing.

Denejkina, Anna. 2025. Young People’s Perception
and Use of Generative Al 2025. The Insight
Centre and Student Edge. https://studentedge-
content.blob.core.windows.net/documents/
youth-insight/2025/05/2025_Young_Peoples_
Perception_and_Use_Of_Generative_Al.pdf.

Deng, Ruigi, Maoli Jiang, Xinlu Yu, Yuyan Lu, and
Shasha Liu. 2025. "Does ChatGPT Enhance Student
Learning? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
of Experimental Studies." Computers & Education
227 (April): 105224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compedu.2024.105224.

Department for Education. 2025. “EdChat—The
Department's Generative Al Chatbot.” Department
for Education, South Australia. https://www.
education.sa.gov.au/parents-and-families/curricu-
lum-and-learning/ai/edchat.

Department for Science, Innovation, and
Technology. 2023. “Online Safety Act: Explainer.”
GOV.UK. https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/online-safety-act-explainer/online-
safety-act-explainer.

Department for Science, Innovation, and
Technology. 2025. “International Scientific Report
on the Safety of Advanced AI: Interim Report.”
GOV.UK, September 15. https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/international-sci-
entific-report-on-the-safety-of-advanced-ai/
international-scientific-report-on-the-safety-of-ad-
vanced-ai-interim-report.

Department for Science, Innovation and
Technology, Office for Artificial Intelligence,
Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport,
and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial
Strategy. 2022. "Establishing a Pro-Innovation
Approach to Regulating Al.” GOV.UK, July 20.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/

establishing-a-pro-innovation-approach-to-regulat-
ing-ai.

Design It for Us. 2025. "Design It for Us." Design It
for Us Al Policy Platform. https://designitforus.org/
platform/design-it-for-us-2025-ai-policy-platform/.

De Simone, Martin Elias, Federico Hernan Tiberti,
Maria Rebeca Barron Rodriguez, Federico Alfredo
Manolio, Wuraola Mosuro, and Eliot Jolomi Dikoru.
2025. From Chalkboards to Chatbots: Evaluating
the Impact of Generative Al on Learning Outcomes
in Nigeria. World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper. https://documents.worldbank.org/en/
publication/documents-reports/documentde-
tail/(099548105192529324.

Deursen, Alexander JAM van, and Jan AGM van
Dijk. 2014. “The Digital Divide Shifts to Differences
in Usage.” New Media and Society 16 (3).
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444813487959.

Deutscher, R. R., N. C. Holthius, S. I. Maldonado, et
al. 2021. Project-Based Learning Leads to Gains in
Science and Other Subjects in Middle School and
Benefits All Learners. Lucas Education Research.
https://www.lucasedresearch.org/publication/
project-based-learning-leads-to-gains-in-science-
and-other-subjects-in-middle-school-and-benefits-
all-learners/.

Dewey, John. 1916. Democracy and Education.
Macmillan.

Dhar, Vilas. 2025. “Al's Development Still Depends
on All of Us.” Boston Globe, May 14. https://www.
bostonglobe.com/2025/05/14/opinion/ai-gover-
nance-regulation-innovation/.

Di Mitri, Daniele, Jan Schneider, Marcus Specht,
and Hendrik Drachsler. 2018. “From Signals to
Knowledge: A Conceptual Model for Multimodal
Learning Analytics." Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning 34 (4): 338-49. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jcal.12288.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

174
Diamond, Adele. 2013. “Executive Functions.”
Annual Review of Psychology 64 (January):
135-68. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
psych-113011-143750.

Diamond, Adele, and Kathleen Lee. 2011.
“Interventions Shown to Aid Executive Function
Development in Children 4 to 12 Years Old.” Science
333 (6045): 959-64. https://doi.org/10.1126/sci-
ence.1204529.

Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith & Dicastery
for Culture and Education. 2025. “Antiqua et
Nova. Note on the Relationship Between Artificial
Intelligence and Human Intelligence." The
Vatican, January 28. https://www.vatican.va/
roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/documents/rc_
ddf_doc_20250128_antiqua-et-nova_en.html.

Digital Promise. 2025. “Responsibly Designed Al."
Digital Promise, October 26. https://digitalpromise.
org/product-certifications/responsibly-de-
signed-ai/.

Dijk, Jan van. 2020. The Digital Divide. John Wiley
& Sons.

DiPaola, Daniella, Andrés F. Salazar-Gomez, Hal
Abelson, Eric Klopfer, David Goldston, and Cynthia
Breazeal. 2024. How Policy Can Help Ensure the
Proper Use of Al in K-12 Education. MIT Media
Lab. https://www.media.mit.edu/publications/
how-policy-can-help-ensure-the-proper-use-of-ai-
in-k-12-education/.

Dixon, Stacy Jo. 2025. "Global Snapchat User Age
& Gender Distribution 2025.” Statista, May 22.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/933948/snap-
chat-global-user-age-distribution/.

Do, Yeseul. 2025. “Beyond Privacy: Regulating
ChatGPT for Young Adults in Educational
Contexts.” NYU Journal of Intellectual Property &
Entertainment Law 14 (2): 263-314.

Doherty, Jonathan. 2020. “A Systematic Review
of Literature on Teacher Attrition and School-

Related Factors That Affect It.” Teacher Education
Advancement Network Journal 12 (1): 75-84.

Dosunmu, Damilare. 2025. “Why Big Tech Is
Threatened by a Global Push for Data Sovereignty.”
Rest of World, July 9. https://restofworld.org/2025/
big-tech-data-sovereignty/.

DSNP.org. 2025. "DSNP—Decentralized Social
Networking Protocol." DSNP, October 28.
https://dsnp.org/.

Duff, Lesley. 2018. "Tackling Teacher Workload:
Should We Ditch the Data?” National Foundation for
Education Research, November 12. https://www.
nfer.ac.uk/blogs/tackling-teacher-workload-should-
we-ditch-the-data/.

Duffy, Clare. 2024. ‘There Are No Guardrails.’ This
Mom Believes an Al Chatbot Is Responsible for Her
Son's Suicide.” CNN, October 30. https://www.
cnn.com/2024/10/30/tech/teen-suicide-charac-
ter-ai-lawsuit.

Duffy, Clare. 2025. “Parents of 16-Year-Old Adam
Raine Sue OpenAl, Claiming ChatGPT Advised on
His Suicide.” CNN, August 27. https://www.cnn.
com/2025/08/26/tech/openai-chatgpt-teen-sui-
cide-lawsuit.

Duricic, Anja. 2024. “Small Language Models: A
Beginner's Guide." Ataccama (blog), November
19. https://www.ataccama.com/blog/small-lan-

guage-models.

Durlak, Joseph A, Joseph L. Mahoney, and Alaina E.
Boyle. 2022. “What We Know, and What We Need
to Find Out About Universal, School-Based Social
and Emotional Learning Programs for Children

and Adolescents: A Review of Meta-Analyses and
Directions for Future Research." Psychological
Bulletin 148 (11-12): 765-82. https://doi.org/10.1037/
bul0000383.

Dwyer, Maddy, and Elizabeth Laird. 2024. Report—
Up in the Air: Educators Juggling the Potential
of Generative Al with Detection, Discipline, and

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

175
Distrust. Center for Democracy and Technology,
March 27. https://cdt.org/insights/report-up-in-the-
air-educators-juggling-the-potential-of-generative-
ai-with-detection-discipline-and-distrust/.

e-Estonia. 2025. “Estonia's groundbreaking national
initiative: Al Leap programme to bring Al tools to all
schools.” e-Estonia, February 26. https://e-estonia.
com/estonia-announces-a-groundbreaking-nation-
al-initiative-ai-leap-program-to-bring-ai-tools-to-
all-schools/.

Economic Times. 2025. “OpenAl and ARISE
Collaborate to Empower K-12 Educators in India with
Al Integration." The Economic Times, September
14. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/
startups/openai-and-arise-collaborate-to-empow-
er-k-12-educators-in-india-with-ai-integration/
articleshow/123881394.cms.

Economist. 2024. “Why Don't Women Use
Artificial Intelligence?” The Economist,
August 8. https://www.economist.com/
finance-and-economics/2024/08/21/
why-dont-women-use-artificial-intelligence.

Economist. 2025. “Banning Smartphones in
Classrooms Helps Students.” The Economist,
September 4. https://www.economist.com/
united-states/2025/09/04/banning-smartphones-
in-classrooms-helps-students.

Edelman Trust Institute. 2025. “2025 Edelman Trust
Barometer: Trust and the Crisis of Grievance with
Insights for the Technology Sector." Edelman Trust
Institute. https://www.edelman.com/sites/g/files/
aatuss191/files/2025-02/2025%20Edelman%20
Trust% 20Barometer_Insights % 20 Technology %20
Sector_FINAL.pdf.

Education Endowment Foundation (EEF). 2016.
“Philosophy for Children.” EEF, December 9.
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.
uk/projects-and-evaluation/projects/philoso-
phy-for-children.

Education Outcomes Fund (EOF). 2025. “The
Evidence.” EOF, October 26. https://www.
educationoutcomesfund.org/copy-of-backup-the-
evidence-old.

Edwards, Charlotte. 2025. “Meta Investigated over
Al Having “Sensual” Chats with Children.” BBC,
August 18. https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/
c3dpmivx1k2o.

Ellipsis. 2025. “High-Demand Radio Frequency
Spectrum.” Ellipsis, February 26. https://www.ellip-
sis.co.za/high-demand-spectrum/.

Elongué, Christian. 2025. “Major Ways African
Languages Are Being Boosted by Al and How LSPs
Can Maximize Them.” Kabod Group, August 29.
https://kabodgroup.com/ways-african-languag-
es-are-being-boosted-by-ai/.

Emerson, Ralph Waldo. 1908. The Essay on Self-
Reliance. The Roycrofters.

Empower Africa. 2025. "Nigeria and Gates
Foundation Launch $7.5 Million Al Scaling

Hub to Transform Key Sectors.” Empower

Africa, June 4. https://empowerafrica.com/
nigeria-and-gates-foundation-launch-7-5-million-
ai-scaling-hub-to-transform-key-sectors/.

Engels, Zoe. 2025. “Al Chat to Support District 12
Teens in Pilot Program." The Record, May 1. https://
www.therecordnorthshore.org/2025/04/30/ai-chat-
to-support-district-112-teens-in-pilot-program/.

Epley, Nicholas. 2019. “Humanity Is Carried on the
Voice." The University of Chicago Booth School of
Business, July 30. https://www.chicagobooth.edu/
review/humanity-carried-voice.

Epstein, Kate. 2025. “We, Robots." Persuasion
(blog), January 13. https://www.persuasion.commu-
nity/p/we-robots.

Ethnologue. 2025. “What Are the Top 200 Most
Spoken Languages?” The Ethnologue. https://www.
ethnologue.com/insights/ethnologue200/.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

176
EU Artificial Intelligence Act. 2024. “High-Level
Summary of the Al Act.” Updated February 27.
https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/high-level-sum-
mary/.

European Commission. 2024. “Al Act." European
Commission. https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/
en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai.

European Commission and OECD. 2025.
Empowering Learners for the Age of Al (review
draft). European Commission and OECD.
https://ailiteracyframework.org/wp-content/
uploads/2025/05/AILitFramework_ReviewDraft.pdf.

Intersoft Consulting. 2016. “General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR)." Intersoft Consulting.
https://gdpr-info.eu/.

European Union. 2025. “Council Simulation Game.”
European Union. https://learning-corner.learning.
europa.eu/learning-materials/council-simula-
tion-game_en.

Fan, Yizhou, Luzhen Tang, Huixiao Le, et al. 2024.
“Beware of Metacognitive Laziness: Effects of
Generative Artificial Intelligence on Learning
Motivation, Processes, and Performance.” British
Journal of Educational Technology 56 (2): 489-
530. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13544.

Fang, Cathy Mengying, Auren R. Liu, Valdemar
Danry, et al. 2025. “How Al and Human Behaviors
Shape Psychosocial Effects of Chatbot Use:

A Longitudinal Randomized Controlled Study.”
Preprint, arXiv:2503.17473, March 21, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.17473.

Federal Trade Commission. 2013. “Children’s
Online Privacy Protection Rule (‘COPPA’).” Federal
Trade Commission, July 25. https://www.ftc.gov/
legal-library/browse/rules/childrens-online-priva-
cy-protection-rule-coppa.

Federal Trade Commission. 2025a. “FTC
Launches Inquiry into Al Chatbots Acting as
Companions." Federal Trade Commission,

September 11. https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/
news/press-releases/2025/09/ftc-launches-inqui-
ry-ai-chatbots-acting-companions.

Federal Trade Commission. 2025b. “Section 5:
Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices.” Federal
Trade Commission. https://www.federalreserve.
gov/boarddocs/supmanual/cch/200806/ftca.pdf.

Feldstein, Steve. 2019. “The Global Expansion
of Al Surveillance.” Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, September 17. https://car-
negieendowment.org/research/2019/09/
the-global-expansion-of-ai-surveillance.

Ferman, Bruno, Lycia Lima, and Flavio Riva.

2021. "Artificial Intelligence, Teacher Tasks and
Individualized Pedagogy.” SocArxiv qw249,
February 17. Center for Open Science. https://ideas.
repec.org//p/osf/socarx/qw249.html.

Findley, Madeleine, Michelle Kallen, and David
Layden. 2024. "A Look at 5 States’ New Data
Privacy Laws.” Jenner.com, October 7. https://www.
jenner.com/a/web/2E TrwFPLALdavo2o0s5Bfz4/law
360-a-look-at-5-states-new-data-privacy-laws.pdf.

Fischer, Julia Freeland. 2025. “Al Can Make
Schools More Human, But Only If Schools
Prioritize Relationship Metrics." Harvard Social
Impact Review, September 12. https://www.
sir.advancedleadership.harvard.edu/articles/
ai-can-make-schools-more-human-if-schools-
prioritize-relationship-metrics.

Floridi, Luciano. 2024. “Hypersuasion—On Al's
Persuasive Power and How to Deal with It.” Center
for Digital Ethics (CEDE). .Network Scholarly Paper
No. 4815890. May 3. https://papers.ssrn.com/
abstract=4815890.

fotonVR. 2025. “Virtual Reality for School
Education.” Foton VR, October 3. https://fotonvr.
com/virtual-reality-for-school-education.

Foucault, Michel. 1995. Discipline and Punish: The
Birth of the Prison. 2nd ed. Vintage Books.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

177
Frantz, Erica, Andrea Kendall-Taylor, and Joseph
Wright. 2020. “Digital Repression in Autocracies."
Varieties of Democracy Institute at the University
of Gothenburg and Notre Dame University Working
Paper. https://www.readkong.com/page/fullscreen/
digital-repression-in-autocracies-erica-frantz-an-
drea-9541444.

Franze, Andrew, Christina R. Galanis, and

Daniel L. King. 2023. “Social Chatbot Use

(e.g., ChatGPT) among Individuals with Social
Deficits: Risks and Opportunities.” Journal of
Behavioral Addictions 12 (4): 871-72. https://doi.
org/10.1556/2006.2023.00057.

Freire, Paulo. 1970. Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
Bloomsbury Academic.

Freitas, Julian De, Zeliha OGuz-Uguralp, and Ahmet
Kaan-Uguralp. 2025. “Emotional Manipulation by
Al Companions." Harvard Business School Working
Paper No. 26-005. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.5390377.

Frequency. 2025. “Frequency: Empowering Self-
Sovereign Digital Identities and User-Controlled
Data.” Frequency, October 28. https://www.fre-
quency.xyz/.

Fukuyama, Francis. 2025. “Delegation and
Destruction.” Persuasion (blog), January 13.
https://www.persuasion.community/p/delega-
tion-and-destruction.

Fuller, Bruce, and Hoyun Kim. 2022. "Systems
Thinking to Transform Schools: Identifying Levers
That Lift Educational Quality.” Brookings Institution,
September 12. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
systems-thinking-to-transform-schools-identify-
ing-levers-that-lift-educational-quality/.

Furze, Leon. 2024. “Synthetic Sycophants: Why
‘Yes-Bots' Are a Problem for Education.” Leon
Furze (blog), November 10. https://leonfurze.
com/2024/11/11/synthetic-sycophants-why-yes-
bots-are-a-problem-for-education/.

Galinsky, Ellen. 2024. The Breakthrough Years:
A New Scientific Framework for Raising Thriving
Teens. Flatiron Books.

Gallup and Walton Family Foundation. 2025.
Teaching for Tomorrow: Unlocking Six Weeks
a Year With Al. Gallup. https://nextgenin-
sights.waltonfamilyfoundation.org/wp-content/
uploads/2025/06/Teachers_Al_Report.pdf.

Gallup, Walton Family Foundation, and
Heartland Forward. 2025. Voices of

Gen Z: Preparing the Heartland for an

Al Future. https://heartlandforward.org/
wp-content/uploads/2025/05/20250507_WFF_
GenZ_HeartlandForward_Al_Report_FINAL.pdf.

Garcia-Méndez, Silvia, Francisco de Arriba-Pérez,
and Maria del Carmen Somoza-Lopez. 2025. "A
Review on the Use of Large Language Models as
Virtual Tutors.” Science & Education 34 (2): 877-92.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11191-024-00530-2.

Gardony, Aaron L., Tad T. Brunyé, and Holly A.
Taylor. 2015. “Navigational Aids and Spatial Memory
Impairment: The Role of Divided Attention." Spatial
Cognition & Computation 15 (4): 246-84.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13875868.2015.1059432.

Garfinkle, Adam. 2020. “The Erosion of Deep
Literacy.” National Affairs 65 (Fall 2025).
https://nationalaffairs.com/publications/detail/the-
erosion-of-deep-literacy.

GDPR Advisor. 2023. "GDPR and Artificial
Intelligence: Challenges and Ethical
Considerations." GDPR Advisor, May 13.
https://www.gdpr-advisor.com/gdpr-and-artifi-
cial-intelligence-challenges-and-ethical-consider-
ations/.

GDPR Advisor. 2024. “Al and Data Privacy:
Navigating GDPR in the Age of Machine
Learning.” GDPR Advisor, August 20. https://www.
gdpr-advisor.com/ai-and-data-privacy-navigating-
gdpr-in-the-age-of-machine-learning/.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

178
Georgetown Law. 2019. “Institute for Public
Representation’s 2018 Complaint Against YouTube
and Google Regarding Protection of Children
Results in Settlement, Fine.” Georgetown Law,
September 5. https://www.law.georgetown.edu/
news/institute-for-public-representations-2018-
complaint-against-youtube-and-google-for-online-
protection-of-children-results-in-settlement-fine/.

Gerlich, Michael. 2025. “Al Tools in Society:
Impacts on Cognitive Offloading and the Future of
Critical Thinking.” Societies 15 (1): 6. https://doi.
org/10.3390/soc15010006.

Ghana Natural Language Processing (NLP). 2025.
"About Us." Ghana Natural Language Processing.
https://ghananlp.org/about.

Ghosh, Pallab. 2025. “The People Who Think Al
Might Become Conscious." BBC, May 26.
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cOk3700zljjo.

Global Partnership for Education. 2023.

"Debt2ed.” Global Partnership, September.
https://www.globalpartnership.org/node/document/
download?file=document/file/2023-09-gpe-fact-
sheet-debt2ed-rev.pdf.

Goldstein, Brett J., and Brett V. Benson. 2025. "The
Era of A.I. Propaganda Has Arrived, and America
Must Act.” The New York Times, August 5.
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/05/opinion/chi-
na-ai-propaganda.html.

Gorichanaz, Tim. 2023. “Accused: How Students
Respond to Allegations of Using ChatGPT on
Assessments.” Learning: Research and Practice 9
(2): 183-96. https://doi.org/10.1080/23735082.2023
-2254787.

Graham, Steve. 2019. "Changing How
Writing Is Taught.” Review of Research
in Education 43 (1): 277-303. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0091732X18821125.

Grand View Research. 2025. "Education Technology
Market (2025-2030).” Grand View Research,

October 3. https://www.grandviewresearch.com/
industry-analysis/education-technology-market.

Grose, Jessica. 2025. “A.I. Will Destroy Critical
Thinking in K-12." The New York Times, May 14.
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/05/14/opinion/
trump-ai-elementary.html.

Grosso, David P., Michelle R. Bowling, Starshine

S. Chun, and Brooke M. Delaney. 2024. "The
Development of Al and Protecting Student Data
Privacy.” ArentFox Schiff (blog), February 21.
https://www.afslaw.com/perspectives/ai-law-blog/
the-development-ai-and-protecting-student-da-
ta-privacy.

GSMA. 2016. “Mobile Privacy Principles:
Promoting Consumer Privacy in the Mobile
Ecosystem.” GSM Association. https://www.gsma.
com/solutions-and-impact/connectivity-for-good/
public-policy/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/
GSMA2016_Guidelines_Mobile_Privacy_Principles.
pdf.

GSMA. 2020. “Connected Women: The Mobile
Gender Gap Report 2020." GSM Association, May.
https://www.gsma.com/solutions-and-impact/
connectivity-for-good/mobile-for-development/
wp-content/uploads/2020/05/GSMA-The-Mobile-
Gender-Gap-Report-2020.pdf.

GSMA. 2025. “The Mobile Economy 2025." GSM
Association, September 5. https://www.gsma.
com/solutions-and-impact/connectivity-for-good/
mobile-economy/.

Guo, Kai, and Deliang Wang. 2024. “To Resist It
or to Embrace It? Examining ChatGPT's Potential
to Support Teacher Feedback in EFL Writing.”
Education and Information Technologies 29 (7):
8435-63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-023-
12146-0.

Gustafsson-Wright, Emily, Izzy Boggild-Jones, Dean
Segell, and Justice Durland. 2017. “Impact Bonds
in Developing Countries: Early Learnings from the
Field.” Brookings Institution. https://www.brookings.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

179
edu/articles/impact-bonds-in-developing-coun-
tries-early-learnings-from-the-field/.

Haidt, Jonathan. 2024. The Anxious Generation:
How the Great Rewiring of Childhood Is Causing an
Epidemic of Mental Iliness. Penguin.

Hale, Annie, Michael Sears, John Harlow, et al.
2025. "Dreamscape Learn Fall 2022-Spring 2024
Campus Immersion Retrospective.” Arizona State
University Course Syllabus. https://drive.google.
com/file/d/1usE73Y 3hrGfOKeaySKVOUN2rn-
7ONbkGx/view.

Han, Ong Hua [MP]. 2024. “Artificial Intelligence.”
Ministry of Education, Singapore: News,
Parliamentary Replies, January 9. http://www.moe.
gov.sg/news/parliamentary-replies/20230109-arti-
ficial-intelligence.

Handa, Kunal, Drew Bent, Alex Tamkin, et al. 2025.
“Anthropic Education Report: How University
Students Use Claude.” Anthropic, April 8.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/anthropic-educa-
tion-report-how-university-students-use-claude.

Hao, Karen. 2025. Empire of Al: Dreams and
Nightmares in Sam Altman's OpenAl. Penguin.

Harari, Yuval Noah. 2024. Nexus: A Brief History
of Information Networks from the Stone Age to Al.
Random House.

Hardman, Philippa. 2025. “The Al Illusion in L&D."
Dr Phil's Newsletter, Powered by DOMSTM Al
(blog), January 31. https://drphilippahardman.sub-
stack.com/p/the-ai-illusion-in-l-and-d.

Haskins, Caroline, and Lauren Goode. 2025. “Grok
Is Spewing Antisemitic Garbage on X." Wired,
September 15. https://www.wired.com/story/grok-
antisemitic-posts-x-xai/.

Hatch, S. Gabe, Zachary T. Goodman, Laura
Vowels, et al. 2025. “When ELIZA Meets
Therapists: A Turing Test for the Heart and Mind.”

PLOS Mental Health 2 (2): e0000145.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmen.0000145.

Hattie, John. 2010. Visible Learning. Routledge.

Hector, Hamish. 2025. “Are You Polite to ChatGPT?
Here's Where You Rank among Al Chatbot

Users.” TechRadar, February 20. https://www.
techradar.com/computing/artificial-intelligence/
are-you-polite-to-chatgpt-heres-where-you-rank-
among-ai-chatbot-users.

Heinz, Michael V., Daniel M. Mackin, Brianna
M. Trudeau, et al. 2025. “Randomized Trial

of a Generative Al Chatbot for Mental Health
Treatment.” New England Journal of Medicine
Al 2 (4): Aloa2400802. https://doi.org/10.1056/
Aloa2400802.

Hendrycks, Dan, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, et
al. 2021. “Measuring Massive Multitask Language
Understanding.” Preprint, arXiv:2009.0330,
January 12, 2021. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2009.03300.

Henrich, Joseph, Steven J. Heine, and Ara
Norenzayan. 2010. “The Weirdest People in the
World?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 (2-3):
61-83. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0999152x.

Heritage, Stuart. 2025. "I Felt Pure,
Unconditional Love’: The People Who Marry Their
Al Chatbots.” The Guardian, July 12.
https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2025/
jul/12/i-felt-pure-unconditional-love-the-people-
who-marry-their-ai-chatbots.

Hill, Heather C., John P. Papay, and Nathaniel
Schwartz. 2022. Dispelling the Myths: What

the Research Says about Teacher Professional
Learning. February 15, 10. https://annenberg.brown.
edu/sites/default/files/rppl-dispelling-myths.pdf.

Hill, Kashmir. 2025. “OpenAl Plans to Add
Safeguards to ChatGPT for Teens and Others in
Distress.” The New York Times, September 2.
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/09/02/technology/

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

180
personaltech/chatgpt-parental-controls-openai.
html.

Ho, Annabell, Jeff Hancock, and Adam S. Miner.
2018. “Psychological, Relational, and Emotional
Effects of Self-Disclosure After Conversations with
a Chatbot.” The Journal of Communication 68 (4):
712-33. https://doi.org/10.1093/joc/jqy026.

Holzer, Andreas, and Martin Daumiller. 2025.
“Building Trust in the Classroom: Perspectives
from Students and Teachers.” European Journal
of Psychology of Education 40 (62). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10212-025-00961-7.

Hord, Shirley M., William L. Rutherford, Leslie
Huling, and Gene E. Hall. 2006. Taking Charge
of Change. Southwest Educational Development
Laboratory.

Hou, Irene, Sophia Metille, Zhuo Li, Owen Man,
Cynthia Zastudil, and Stephen MacNeil. 2024.

"The Effects of Generative Al on Computing
Students’ Help-Seeking Preferences.” Proceedings
of the 26th Australasian Computing Education
Conference (ACE ‘24). January 29. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 39-48.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3636243.3636248.

Howdle, Dan. 2023. "The Cost of 1GB Of Mobile
Data in 237 Countries.” Bestbroadbanddeals.
https://bestbroadbanddeals.co.uk/mobiles/world-
wide-data-pricing/.

HP. 2025. "Al and Education: A Helpful Guide for.”
HP, May 7. https://www.hp.com/nz-en/shop/tech-
takes/post/ai-education-guide-for-parents.

Hradecky, Alex, and Abdulhakeem Abdulkareem.
2025. "African Entrepreneurs Are Redefining How
Al Can Drive Sustainable Development.” UNDP
Digital, Al and Innovation Hub, September 2.
https://www.undp.org/digital/blog/african-entre-
preneurs-are-redefining-how-ai-can-drive-sustain-
able-development.

Huckins, Grace. 2025. “OpenAl Has Finally
Released Open-Weight Language Models.” MIT
Technology Review, October 14. https://www.
technologyreview.com/2025/08/05/1121092/
openai-has-finally-released-open-weight-lan-
guage-models/.

Huxley, Aldous. 1932. Brave New World. Harper
Perennial.

Ihichr, Adel, Omar Oustous, Younes El Bouzekri El
Idrissi, and Ayoub Ait Lahcen. 2024. “A Systematic
Review on Assessment in Adaptive Learning:
Theories, Algorithms and Techniques." International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and
Applications 15 (7). https://doi.org/10.14569/
IJACSA.2024.0150785.

Imagine Learning. 2025. “Imagine Learning.”
Imagine Learning. https://www.imaginelearning.
com/pdf-viewer/.

Immordino-Yang, Mary Helen. 2022. "Purpose,
Feelings, Deep Thinking, and Relationships
Drive Brain Development.” Kappan Online,
March 3. https://kappanonline.org/
purpose-feelings-deep-thinking-and-relation-
ships-brain-development-immordino-yang/.

Immordino-Yang, Mary Helen. 2025. “How
Transcendent Thinking Boosts Teen Brains and
Enhances Life." Scientific American, January
21. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
transcendent-thinking-boosts-teen-brains-in-
ways-that-enhance-life/.

Immordino-Yang, Mary Helen, and Antonio
Damasio. 2007. “We Feel, Therefore We Learn: The
Relevance of Affective and Social Neuroscience to
Education.” Mind, Brain, and Education 1 (1): 3-10.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-228X.2007.00004.x.

Independent Communications Authority of

South Africa. 2021. Electronic Communications
Act: Licensing Process for International Mobile
Applications in Respect of the Provision of Mobile
Broadband Wireless Access Services: Invitation to

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

181
Apply. https://www.gov.za/sites/default/files/gcis_
document/202112/45628gen717.pdf.

Infocomm Media Development Authority. 2025.

“A Guide to Cyber Safety for Kids at Every Age.”
Infocomm Media Development Authority.
https://www.imda.gov.sg/resources/blog/blog-arti-
cles/2025/09/cyber-safety-for-kids-at-every-age.

Ingersoll, Richard, Lennon Audrain, and Mary
Laski. n.d. “Team-Based Staffing, Teacher
Authority, and Teacher Turnover.” https://crpe.org/
team-based-staffing-teacher-authority-and-teach-
er-turnover/.

Ingersoll, Richard M., and Richard Audrain. 2025.
"The Teaching Model That's Keeping Educators in
Schools.” ASCD 82 (7). https://www.ascd.org/el/
articles/the-teaching-model-thats-keeping-educa-
tors-in-schools.

International Society for Technology in Education
(ISTE). 2024. “Evolving Teacher Education in an Al
World.” ISTE. https://info.iste.org/evolvingteach-
ered-ai.

International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
2023a. “Economy Classifications.” ITU.
https://www.itu.int:443/en/ITU-D/Statistics/pages/
definitions/regions.aspx.

International Telecommunication Union. 2023b.
“Measuring Digital Development: Facts and
Figures.” ITU. https://www.itu.int/hub/publica-
tion/d-ind-ict_mdd-2023-1/.

International Telecommunication Union. 2024.
“Facts and Figures 2024—Mobile Phone
Ownership." ITU. https://www.itu.int/itu-d/reports/

statistics/2024/11/10/ff24-mobile-phone-ownership.

Internet Matters Team. 2025. “Me, Myself and Al
Chatbot Research." Internet Matters. https://www.
internetmatters.org/hub/research/me-myself-and-
ai-chatbot-research/.

Ipsos. 2024. "Common Sense Media Ipsos
Generative Al Survey of Parents and Teens." Ipsos.
https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/
documents/2024-09/Common%20Sense% 20
Media% 20|psos%20Generative%20AI%20
Survey %200f%20Parents %20and%20Teens%20
09192024.pdf.

ISTE (International Society for Technology
in Education). 2025. “Artificial Intelligence in
Education." ISTE. https://iste.org/ai.

iThrive Games. 2025. “Home.” iThrive Games,
October 26. https://ithrivegames.org.

lyengar, Sunil. 2024. “Federal Data on Reading

for Pleasure: All Signs Show a Slump." National
Endowment for the Arts (blog), October 3.
https://www.arts.gov/stories/blog/2024/federal-da-
ta-reading-pleasure-all-signs-show-slump.

JA Worldwide. n.d. “JA Boost: Where Al Meets
the Future of Learning.” JA Worldwide, accessed
December 15, 2025. https://www.jaworldwide.org/
jaboost.

Jain, Ronak, and Samuel Stemper. 2024. "3G
Internet and Human Capital Development.”
University of Zurich Department of Economics
Working Paper no. 453. https://www.ictworks.org/
wp-content/uploads/2025/07/3G-use-reduces-
test-score.pdf.

Jesuit, David K., and Brian Endless. 2018. “Model
United Nations and Experiential Learning: An
Assessment of Changes in Knowledge and
Attitudes.” Journal of Social Studies Education
Research 9 (4): 198-213.

Jiang, Yuan-Hao, Yuang Wei, Xiaobao Shao,

Rui Jia, Yizhou Zhou, and Zi-Wei Chen. 2025.
“Generative Al in Personalized Learning:
Development Trajectory, Educational
Applications, and Future Education.” Paper pre-
sented at the 36th annual conference of the
Society for Information Technology and Teacher
Education (SITE 2025), Orlando, Florida,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

182
March 17, 2025. https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/389826421_Generative_Al_in_
Personalized_Learning_Development_Trajectory_
Educational_Applications_and_Future_Education.

Johansen, Vegard. 2018. Innovation

Cluster for Entrepreneurship Education.
@stlandsforskning/ Eastern Norway Research
Institute. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/327623618_Innovation_Cluster_for_
Entrepreneurship_Education#fullTextFileContent.

Johinke, Rebecca, Robert Cummings, and Frances
Di Lauro. 2023. "Reclaiming the Technology of
Higher Education for Teaching Digital Writing in

a Post-Pandemic World.” Journal of University
Teaching & Learning Practice 20 (2).
https://doi.org/10.53761/1.20.02.01.

Johnson, Arianna. 2023. “ChatGPT in

Schools: Here's Where It's Banned—And

How It Could Potentially Help Students.”

Forbes, January 18. https://www.forbes.
com/sites/ariannajohnson/2023/01/18/
chatgpt-in-schools-heres-where-its-banned-and-
how-it-could-potentially-help-students/.

Johnson, Jaivarsini. 2024. “Effect of Emotions on
Learning, Memory, and Disorders Associated with
the Changes in Expression Levels: A Narrative
Review." Brain Circulation 10 (2): 134-44.
https://doi.org/10.4103/bc.bc_86_23.

Johnson, Matt. 2021. “The Rising Loneliness
Economy." Psychology Today, December 16.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/
mind-brain-and-value/202112/the-rising-loneli-
ness-economy.

Joon-hyun, Moon. 2025. "Al Chats Feel ‘Emotionally
Meaningful,’ Say about 40% of Young South
Koreans in Survey." The Korea Herald, February 26.
https://www.koreaherald.com/article/10429545.

Kai, Ng Wei. 2022. “NIE to Train Teachers in Using
Al in Classroom, Invest in Research.” The Straits
Times, May 25. https://www.straitstimes.com/

singapore/parenting-education/nie-to-train-teach-
ers-in-using-ai-in-classroom-invest-in-research.

Kaliisa, Rogers, Kamila Misiejuk, Sonsoles Lopez-
Pernas, and Mohammed Saqr. 2025. "How Does
Artificial Intelligence Compare to Human Feedback?
A Meta-Analysis of Performance, Feedback
Perception, and Learning Dispositions." Educational
Psychology, September 24, 1-32. https://doi.org/10.
1080/01443410.2025.2553639.

Kang, Cecilia. 2023. "Sam Altman, ChatGPT Creator
and OpenAl CEO, Urges Senate for Al Regulation.”
The New York Times, May 16. https://www.nytimes.
com/2023/05/16/technology/openai-altman-artifi-
cial-intelligence-regulation.html.

Kang, Cecilia. 2025. "A.I.-Generated Images of
Child Sexual Abuse Are Flooding the Internet.” The
New York Times, July 10. https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/07/10/technology/ai-csam-child-sexual-
abuse.html.

Kannan, Prabha. 2024. "How Harmful Are Al's
Biases on Diverse Student Populations?” Stanford
University Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence,
October 3. https://hai.stanford.edu/news/
how-harmful-are-ais-biases-on-diverse-stu-
dent-populations.

Kasneci, Enkelejda, Kathrin Sessler, Stefan
Kiichemann, et al. 2023. “ChatGPT for Good? On
Opportunities and Challenges of Large Language
Models for Education.” Learning and Individual
Differences 103 (April): 102274. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.lindif.2023.102274.

Kaufman, Julia H., Ashley Woo, Joshua Eagan,
Sabrina Lee, and Emma B. Kassan. 2025. Uneven
Adoption of Artificial Intelligence Tools Among U.S.
Teachers and Principals in the 2023-2024 School
Year. RAND, February 11. https://www.rand.org/
pubs/research_reports/RRA134-25.html.

Kelly, Rhea. 2025. “New National Academy for
Al Instruction to Provide Free Al Training for
Educators." Technological Horizons in Education

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

183
(THE) Journal, July 9. https://thejournal.com/
Articles/2025/07/09/New-National-Academy-for-
Al-Instruction-to-Provide-Free-Al-Training-for-
Educators.aspx.

KERIS (Korea Education and Research Information
Service). 2025. “Digital Education for All: KERIS.”
KERIS, September 29. https://www.keris.or.kr/eng/
main.do.

Kestin, Greg, Kelly Miller, Anna Klales, Timothy
Milbourne, and Gregorio Ponti. 2025. “Al Tutoring
Outperforms In-Class Active Learning: An RCT
Introducing a Novel Research-Based Design in an
Authentic Educational Setting.” Scientific Reports
15 (1): 17458. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-
97652-6.

Khan Academy. 2025. “Khanmigo for Learners:
Always-Available Tutor, Powered by Al.” Khan
Academy, September 13. https://www.khanmigo.ai/
learners.

Khodyakov, Dmitry. 2023. “Generating Evidence
Using the Delphi Method.” RAND, October 17.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/commentary/2023/10/
generating-evidence-using-the-delphi-method.
html.

Kleiman, Glenn M., and H. Alix Gallagher. 2024.
“State Education Policy and the New Artificial
Intelligence.” National Association of State Boards
of Education (NASBE). https://www.nasbe.org/
state-education-policy-and-the-new-artificial-intel-
ligence/.

Klein, Gary. 2007. "Performing a Project
Premortem.” Harvard Business Review 85 (9):
18-19.

Klein, Gary. 2021. “The Pre-Mortem Method.”
Psychology Today, January 14. https://www.
psychologytoday.com/us/blog/seeing-what-others-
dont/202101/the-pre-mortem-method.

Klein, Lauren, Meredith Martin, André Brock,
et al. 2025. "Provocations from the Humanities

for Generative Al Research.” Preprint,
arXiv:2502.19190, February 26, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.19190.

Kosmyna, Nataliya, Eugene Hauptmann, Ye
Tong Yuan, et al. 2025. "Your Brain on ChatGPT:
Accumulation of Cognitive Debt When Using an
Al Assistant for Essay Writing Task.” Preprint,
arXiv:2506.08872, June 10, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.08872.

Kranzberg, Melvin. 1986. “Technology and History:
‘Kranzberg's Laws.” Technology and Culture 27 (3):
544-60. https://doi.org/10.2307/3105385.

Krishnamurti, Jiddu. 1953. Education and the
Significance of Life. Harper.

Kuerban, Yushan, Solomon Sunday Oyelere,

and Ismaila Temitayo Sanusi. 2025. “ReadSmart:
Generative Al and Augmented Reality Solution

for Supporting Students with Dyslexia Learning
Disabilities.” International Journal of Technology
in Education and Science 9 (1): 159-76. https://doi.
org/10.46328/ijtes.599.

Kulik, James A., and J. D. Fletcher. 2016.
“Effectiveness of Intelligent Tutoring

Systems: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Review of
Educational Research 86 (1): 42-78. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0034654315581420.

Kumar, Ajay, Thomas H. Davenport, and Randy
Bean. 2025. “The Case for Using Small Language
Models.” Harvard Business Review, October 14.
https://hbr.org/2025/09/the-case-for-using-small-
language-models.

Kumayama, Ken D., Stuart D. Levi, William E.
Ridgway, et al. 2025. “Landmark California Al
Safety Legislation May Serve as a Model for Other
States in the Absence of Federal Standards.”
Skadden, October 2. https://www.skadden.com/
insights/publications/2025/10/landmark-califor-
nia-ai-safety-legislation.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

184
Kurian, Nomisha. 2024. “No, Alexa, No!': Designing
Child-Safe Al and Protecting Children from the
Risks of the ‘Empathy Gap’ in Large Language
Models." Learning, Media and Technology, July 10.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2024.2367052.

Laird, Elizabeth, Maddy Dwyer, and Hannah
Quay-de la Vallee. 2025. “Hand in Hand:

Schools’ Embrace of Al Connected to Increased
Risks to Students.” Center for Democracy and
Technology, October 8. https://cdt.org/insights/
hand-in-hand-schools-embrace-of-ai-connected-
to-increased-risks-to-students/.

Lake, Robin. 2023. “Shockwaves & Innovations:
How Nations Worldwide Are Dealing with

Al in Education.” The 74 Million, August

7. https://www.the74million.org/article/
shockwaves-innovations-how-nations-world-
wide-are-dealing-with-ai-in-education/.

Lanier, Jaron. 2025. “Your A.|. Lover Will Change
You." The New Yorker, March 22. https://www.
newyorker.com/culture/the-weekend-essay/your-
ai-lover-will-change-you.

Lanz, Jose Antonio. 2025. “Al's Premium Price
Tags Are Creating a New Digital Divide." Decrypt,
February 23. https://decrypt.co/306117/ai-premi-
um-price-tags-new-digital-divide.

Latham and Watkins. 2025. “California Assumes
Role as Lead US Regulator of Al.” Latham and
Watkins LLP, October 15. https://www.|w.com/en/
insights/california~-assumes-role-as-lead-us-regu-
lator-of-ai.

Learn and Work. 2025. “Al Literacy Framework for
Primary & Secondary Education—OECD-EC.” Learn
& Work Ecosystem Library. https://learnwork
ecosystemlibrary.com/initiatives/ai-literacy-frame-
work-for-primary-secondary-education-oecd-ec/.

Learning Accelerator. 2025. “Driving EdTech
Systems: Student Data Privacy.” The Learning
Accelerator, December 1. https://practices.

learningaccelerator.org/strategies/driving-ed-
tech-systems-student-data-privacy.

Learning Equality. 2025. “Home Page.” Learning
Equality, October 15. http://learningequality.org/.

Learning Policy Institute. 2024. “2024 Update:
What's the Cost of Teacher Turnover?”

Learning Policy Institute, September 17.
https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/product/2024-
whats-cost-teacher-turnover.

LearnLab. 2025. “Introduction to Learning
Engineering.” LearnLab, October 26. https://learn-
lab.org/introduction-to-learning-engineering/.

LearnLM Team, Google, Alicia Martin, et al. 2025.
“Towards an Al-Augmented Textbook.” Preprint,
arXiv:2509.13348, September 30, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2509.13348.

Lee, Hao-Ping, Sarkar Advait, Lev Tankelevitch, et
al. 2025. “The Impact of Generative Al on Critical
Thinking: Self-Reported Reductions in Cognitive
Effort and Confidence Effects from a Survey of
Knowledge Workers." Proceedings of the 2025
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems Article 1121 (April): 1-22. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3706598.3713778.

Leliévre, Maxime, Amy Waldock, Meng Liu,

et al. 2025. "Benchmarking the Pedagogical
Knowledge of Large Language Models.” Preprint,
arXiv:2506.18710. Version 1. June 23, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.18710.

Lembke, Anna. 2023. “Applying the Bradford Hill
Criteria to Social Media Use and Adolescent Mental
Health.” After Babel (blog), March 9. https://www.
afterbabel.com/p/bradford-hill-social-media.

Lesan. 2025. "Lesan Al.” Lesan, October 26.
https://lesan.ai/about.html.

Letort, Brian, and Kadri Linsak-Goode. 2025.
“What Is Sovereign Al?.” Digital Realty, October 10.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

185
https://www.www.digitalrealty.com/resources/arti-
cles/what-is-sovereign-ai?t=1760120896645/?latest.

Levia, Benjamin, Ana T. Ribeiro, Chris Agnew, and
Susanna Loeb. 2025. How K-12 Educators Are
Actually Engaging with Al: Early Findings from an
EdTech Platform. Stanford Scale. https://scale.
stanford.edu/research-in-action/how-k12-educa-
tors-engaging-with-ai.

Levy, Steven. 2025. “Trump's Anti-Bias Al Order
Is Just More Bias.” WIRED, July 25. https://www.
wired.com/story/trump-ai-order-bias-openai-goo-
gle/.

Lin, Zhiqiang, Huan Sun, and Ness Shroff. 2025. “Al
Safety vs. Al Security: Demystifying the Distinction
and Boundaries.” Preprint, arXiv:2506.18932,
Version 1. June 21, 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2506.18932.

Long, Duri, and Brian Magerko. 2020. “What
Is Al Literacy? Competencies and Design
Considerations." Proceedings of the 2020
CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, April 23, 1-16. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3313831.3376727.

Lunabase.ai. 2025. "The Evolution of Al Language
Models: From ChatGPT to GPT-5 and Beyond.”
Luna, October 21. https://lunabase.ai/blog/
the-evolution-of-ai-language-models-from-chat-
gpt-to-gpt-5-and-beyond.

Luo, Heng. 2023. “Editorial: Advances in
Multimodal Learning: Pedagogies, Technologies,
and Analytics." Frontiers in Psychology 14
(October): 1286092. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2023.1286092.

Luo, Heng, Gege Li, Qinna Feng, Yuqin Yang, and
Mingzhang Zuo. 2021. "Virtual Reality in K-12 and
Higher Education: A Systematic Review of the
Literature from 2000 to 2019." Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 37 (March): 887-901.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12538.

Lyons-Cunha, Jenny. 2025. "What Are Al
Companions?" Built In, November 19. https://builtin.
com/artificial-intelligence/ai-companions.

Macleod, Ewen. 2021. "Data and Evidence on
Forced Displacement: Reflections on Progress and
Challenges.” Force Migration Review 66 (Mental
Health and Psychosocial Support): 46-50.

Madden, Mary, Angela Calvin, Alexa Hasse, and
Amanda Lenhart. 2024. The Dawn of the Al Era:
Teens, Parents, and the Adoption of Generative Al
at Home and School. Common Sense.
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/sites/default/
files/research/report/2024-the-dawn-of-the-ai-era_
final-release-for-web.pdf.

Mah, Christopher, Tan, Mei, Phalen, Lena,
Sparks, Alexa, and Demszky, Dorottya. 2025.
“From Sentence-Corrections to Deeper Dialogue:
Qualitative Insights from LLM and Teacher
Feedback on Student Writing.” EdWorkingPaper
No. 25-1193 (May). https://doi.org/10.26300/
P397-2P46.

Mahari, Robert, and Pat Pataranutaporn.

2025. “Addictive Intelligence: Understanding
Psychological, Legal, and Technical Dimensions of
Al Companionship.” MIT Case Studies in Social and
Ethical Responsibilities of Computing (Winter 2025).
https://doi.org/10.21428/2c646de5.2877155b.

Mahari, Robert, and Alex Pentland. 2024.
“Regulation by Design: A New Paradigm for
Regulating Al Systems.” Digital Single Market
and Artificial Intelligence: Al Act and Intellectual
Property in the Digital Transition (17): 431-41.
https://doi.org/10.53136/979122181150627.

Major, Louis, and Gill A. Francis. 2020. Technology-
Supported Personalised Learning: A Rapid
Evidence Review. EdTech Hub/Zenodo.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4556925.

Major, Louis, Gill A. Francis, and Maria Tsapali.
2021. "The Effectiveness of Technology-Supported
Personalised Learning in Low- and Middle-Income

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

186
Countries: A Meta-Analysis." British Journal of
Educational Technology 52: 1935-64. https://doi.
org/10.1111/bjet.13116.

Malek Ash, Andrea. 2025. "Three in 10 Teachers
Use Al Weekly, Saving Six Weeks a Year.” Gallup.
com, June 24. https://news.gallup.com/poll/691967/
three-teachers-weekly-saving-six-weeks-year.
aspx.

Maples, Bethanie, Merve Cerit, Aditya Vishwanath,
and Roy Pea. 2024. “Loneliness and Suicide
Mitigation for Students Using GPT3-Enabled
Chatbots.” NPJ Mental Health Research 3 (1): 4.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44184-023-00047-6.

Maples, Bethanie, Roy D. Upadyaya, and David
Markowitz. 2023. “Learning from Intelligent Social
Agents as Social and Intellectual Mirrors." In Al in
Learning: Designing the Future, edited by Hannele
Niemi, Roy D. Pea, and Yu Lu. Springer International
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
09687-7.

Market.us. 2025. Global Al Companion App Market
Size, Share, Statistics Analysis Report. Market.us
No. 136977. https://market.us/report/ai-compan-
ion-app-market/.

Marton, F., and R. Salj6. 1976. “On Qualitative
Differences in Learning: I—Outcome and Process.”
British Journal of Educational Psychology 46 (1):
4-11. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8279.1976.
tb02980.x.

Marzuki, Utami Widiati, Diyenti Rusdin, Darwin, and
Inda Indrawati. 2023. “The Impact of Al Writing
Tools on the Content and Organization of Students’
Writing: EFL Teachers’ Perspective." Cogent
Education 10 (2): 2236469. https://doi.org/10.1080/
2331186X.2023.2236469.

Masakhane. 2025. "Masakhane: A Grassroots NLP
Community for Africa, by Africans." Masakhane,
October 26. https://www.masakhane.io/.

Masters, Geoff. 2021. “Computer Adaptive
Testing—Challenging Traditional Thinking.” Teacher
Magazine, June 21. https://www.teachermagazine.
com/au_en/articles/computer-adaptive-test-
ing-challenging-traditional-thinking.

McCabe, David. 2025. “Regulators Are Digging
into A.I|. Chatbots and Child Safety.” The New

York Times, September 11. https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/09/11/technology/google-meta-chatgpt-
ai-chatbots.html.

McCrae, Phil. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence in
Education: Anticipating the Disruptions and
Mapping the Future.” Alberta Teachers Association
Social Studies Specialist Council Provincial Event,
May 8.

McKinsey & Company. 2024. “What Are Al
Guardrails?” McKinsey, November 14. https://www.
mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-explain-
ers/what-are-ai-guardrails.

McLennan, April. 2025. “Al Chatbots Accused of
Encouraging Teen Suicide as Experts Sound Alarm."
RNZ, August 15. https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/
world/570138/ai-chatbots-accused-of-encourag-
ing-teen-suicide-as-experts-sound-alarm.

Mehra, Samiksha. 2020. "How India Is Integrating

Al in the New Education Policy.” IndiaAl, August 3.
https://indiaai.gov.in/article/now-india-is-integrat-
ing-ai-in-the-new-education-policy.

Mehta, Arun C. 2020. “Online Education,
Elementary Education.” Education for All in India,
October 18. https://educationforallinindia.com/
online-education/.

Mehta, Ivan. 2025. “OpenAl Says ChatGPT Is on
Track to Reach 700M Weekly Users.” TechCrunch,
August 4. https://techcrunch.com/2025/08/04/
openai-says-chatgpt-is-on-track-to-reach-700m-
weekly-users/.

Meniado, Joel C., Duong Thi Thu Huyen, Nopparat
Panyadilokpong, and Pannaphatt Lertkomolwit.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

187
2024. “Using ChatGPT for Second Language
Writing: Experiences and Perceptions of EFL
Learners in Thailand and Vietnam.” Computers and
Education: Artificial Intelligence 7 (December):
100313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100313.

Merod, Anna. 2025. "“Ransomware Attacks Surge
69% across Global Education Sector.” K-12

Dive, April 14. https://www.k12dive.com/news/
ransomware-attacks-surge-69-across-global-edu-
cation-sector/745153/.

Meyer, Jennifer, Thorben Jansen, Ronja Schiller,
et al. 2024. “Using LLMs to Bring Evidence-
Based Feedback into the Classroom: Al-Generated
Feedback Increases Secondary Students’ Text
Revision, Motivation, and Positive Emotions.”
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence

6 (June): 100199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
caeai.2023.100199.

Miao, Fengchun, Wayne Holmes, Ronghuai Huang,
and Hui Zhang. 2021. Al and Education: Guidance
for Policy-Makers. UNESCO.
https://doi.org/10.54675/PCSP7350.

Miao, Fengchun, and Wayne Holmes. 2023.
Guidance for Generative Al in Education and
Research. UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000386693.

Microsoft. 2025a. 2025 Al in Education: A Microsoft
Special Report. Microsoft. https://cdn-dynmedia-1.
microsoft.com/is/content/microsoftcorp/microsoft/
bade/documents/products-and-services/en-us/
education/2025-Microsoft-Al-in-Education-Report.
pdf.

Microsoft. 2025b. “What Is a Chatbot?” Microsoft.
https://www.microsoft.com/en/microsoft-copilot/
copilot-101/what-is-a-chatbot.

Microsoft Source. 2025a. "AFT to Launch National
Academy for Al Instruction with Microsoft, OpenAl,
Anthropic and United Federation of Teachers.”
Microsoft Source, July 8. https://news.microsoft.
com/source/2025/07/08/aft-to-launch-nation-

al-academy-for-ai-instruction-with-microsoft-ope-
nai-anthropic-and-united-federation-of-teachers/.

Microsoft Source. 2025b. “Pearson and Microsoft
Announce Multiyear Partnership to Transform the
Future of Learning and Work with Al." Microsoft
Source, January 14. https://news.microsoft.com/
source/2025/01/14/pearson-and-microsoft-an-
nounce-multiyear-partnership-to-transform-the-fu-
ture-of-learning-and-work-with-ai/.

Milmo, Dan. 2022. “Molly Russell: How Family

Are Helping Shift Narrative on Online Safety." The
Guardian, September 30. https://www.theguardian.
com/technology/2022/sep/30/molly-russell-fami-
ly-helping-shift-online-safety-regulation.

Mishra, Punya. 2024. “Al'nt Fair: Why Al May

Make Learning Gaps Wider.” Punya Mishra (blog),
November 19. https://punyamishra.com/2024/11/19/
aint-fair-why-ai-may-make-learning-gaps-wider/.

Mishra, Punya. 2025. “Engineered for
Attachment: The Hidden Psychology of Al
Companions.” Punya Mishra (blog), August

1. https://punyamishra.com/2025/05/02/
engineered-for-attachment-the-hidden-psycholo-
gy-of-ai-companions/.

Mitchell, Deborah J., J. Edward Russo, and Nancy
Pennington. 1989. “Back to the Future: Temporal
Perspective in the Explanation of Events.” Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making 2 (1): 25. https://doi.
org/10.1002/BDM.3960020103.

Mollick, Ethan, Lilach Mollick, Natalie Bach, L. J.
Ciccarelli, Ben Przystanski, and Daniel Ravipinto.
2024. “Al Agents and Education: Simulated Practice
at Scale.” Preprint, arXiv:2407.12796, June 20,
2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.12796.

Moon, Kibum, Adam E. Green, and Kostadin
Kushlev. 2025a. “"Homogenizing Effect of Large
Language Models (LLMs) on Creative Diversity:
An Empirical Comparison of Human and ChatGPT
Writing.” Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

188
Humans 6 (December): 100207. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chbah.2025.100207.

Moon, Kibum, Kostadin Kushlev, Andrew Bank,
Indre Viskontas, and Adam Green. 2025b. “LLM-
Era College Admissions Essays Exhibit Paradoxical
Semantic Trends.” Preprint, PsyArXiv, Jsz58_v4.
October 22, 2025. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/
jsz58_v4.

Moore, Steven, Lydia Eckstein, Christine Kwon, and
John Stamper. 2025. “Generative Al in Instructional
Design Education: Effects on Novice Microlesson
Quality.” In Artificial Intelligence in Education,
edited by Alexandra I. Cristea, Erin Walker, Yu Lu,
Olga C. Santos, and Seiji lsotani. Springer Nature
Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
98459-4_35.

Moorosi, Nyalleng. 2024. "Better Data Sets Won't
Solve the Problem—We Need Al for Africa to Be
Developed in Africa.” Nature 636 (8042): 276-276.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-024-03988-w.

Mormando, Samuel. 2025. “A Stoplight Model for
Guiding Student Al Usage.” Edutopia, December 1.
https://www.edutopia.org/article/creating-ai-us-
age-guidelines-students/.

Mosseri, Adam, and Alexandr Wang. 2025. “Our
Approach to Teen Al Safety: Empowering Parents,
Protecting Teens.” Meta, October 17. https://about.
fb.com/news/2025/10/teen-ai-safety-approach/.

Mounk, Yasha. 2024. "Freya India on How to
Free the Anxious Generation." Persuasion (blog),
November 15. https://www.persuasion.communi-
ty/p/freya-india-on-how-to-free-the-anxious.

Mozilla Foundation. 2025. "About Our
Methodology.” Mozilla Foundation, September 10.
https://www.mozillafoundation.org/en/privacynotin-
cluded/.

Muncey, Nikki. 2025. “How Teachers Can Use Al
Chatbots in History Class." SchoolAl, August 15.

https://schoolai.com/blog/engaging-in-history-
class-using-ai-chatbots-as-a-teaching-tool.

Myers, Steven Lee, and Stuart A. Thompson. 2025.
“Right-Wing Chatbots Turbocharge America’s
Political and Cultural Wars." The New York Times,
November 4. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/11/04/
business/right-wing-chatbots-gab-arya-chatgpt-
gemini.html.

Nakashima, Ryan. 2018. "Google Tracks Your
Movements, Like It or Not.” AP News, August 13.
https://apnews.com/article/828aefab64d4411ba-
c257a07clafOecb.

Natale, Simone. 2021. Deceitful Media: Artificial
Intelligence and Social Life after the Turing Test.
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
oso/9780190080365.001.0001.

Natale, Simone, and lliana Depounti. 2024. “Artificial
Sociality." Human-Machine Communication 7:
83-98. https://doi.org/10.30658/hmc.7.5.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine. 2018. How People Learn II: The Science
and Practice of Learning. National Academies
Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/24783.

National Center for Education Statistics. 2024.
"NAEP Long-Term Trend Assessment Results:
Reading and Mathematics.” The Nation's Report
Card. https://www.nationsreportcard.gov/highlights/
Itt/2023/.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine. 2018. How People Learn II: The Science
and Practice of Learning. National Academies
Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/24783.

National Commission on Teaching and America's
Future. 2003. The High Cost of Teacher Turnover.
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED 498001.

National Education Association (NEA). 2025.
“Vetting Al Resources.” NEA, June 20. https://www.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

189
nea.org/professional-excellence/student-engage-
ment/tools-tips/vetting-ai-resources.

National Scientific Council on the Developing Child.
2004. “Young Children Develop in an Environment
of Relationships” Working Paper No. 1. https://
developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/work-
ing-paper/wp1/.

Newman, Lily Hay. 2021. “iOS 14.5 Lets You Stop
Ads from Tracking You—So Do It." WIRED, April
26. https://www.wired.com/story/ios-app-track-
ing-transparency-advertising/.

Newman, Lily Hay. 2025. “Vibe Coding Is the New
Open Source—in the Worst Way Possible.” WIRED,
October 6. https://www.wired.com/story/vibe-cod-
ing-is-the-new-open-source/.

Ng, Davy Tsz Kit, Chee Wei Tan, and Jac Ka Lok
Leung. 2024. “Empowering Student Self-Regulated
Learning and Science Education through ChatGPT:
A Pioneering Pilot Study.” British Journal of
Educational Technology 55 (4): 1328-53.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13454.

Nickow, Andre, Philip Oreopoulos, and Vincent
Quan. 2020. "The Impressive Effects of Tutoring on
PreK-12 Learning: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis of the Experimental Evidence.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
27476, July. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27476.

Niemi, Hannele, Roy D. Pea, and Yu Lu, eds. 2023.
Al in Learning: Designing the Future. Springer
Nature. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-09687-7.

Niloy, Annaf Chowdhury, Salma Akter, Nayeema
Sultana, Jakia Sultana, and Sayed Imran Ur
Rahman. 2024. “Is Chatgpt a Menace for Creative
Writing Ability? An Experiment.” Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning 40 (2): 919-30.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12929.

Noack, Rick. 2024. “As Taliban Limits Options
for Afghan Women, Many Lead Secret Lives
Online." The Washington Post, July 5.

https://www.washingtonpost.com/
world/2024/07/03/afghan-women-girls-online-ed-
ucation/.

Nordicity. 2025. Roblox US Economic Impact
Assessment 2025. Roblox. https://cdn.buttercms.
com/kDdTBLOwSamCajkQ2esD.

Nye, Benjamin D., Dillon Mee, and Mark G Core.
2023. “Generative Large Language Models for
Dialog-Based Tutoring: An Early Consideration of
Opportunities and Concerns." CEUR Workshop
Proceedings, July 7, 11. https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-
3487/paper4.pdf.

O'Donnell, Anna. 2025. “From Crisis to Classroom:
How the UN Supports Education in Conflict Zones.”
United Nations News, July 17. https://news.un.org/
en/story/2025/07/1165417.

OECD. 2015. Students, Computers and Learning:
Making the Connection. PISA, OECD.
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264239555-en.

OECD. 2021a. All the Lonely People:
Education and Loneliness. Trends Shaping
Education Spotlights, No. 23, OECD.
https://doi.org/10.1787/23ac0e25-en.

OECD. 2021b. Measuring Well-Being in the Digital
Age. OECD Going Digital Toolkit Notes, No. 6,
OECD. https://doi.org/10.1787/1891bb63-en.

Ofcom (Office of Communications). 2024. “Quick
Guide to Implementing Highly Effective Age
Assurance." Www.ofcom.org.uk, February 23.
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/online-safety/ille-
gal-and-harmful-content/age-assurance.

Office of the Attorney General of California.
2024. "Attorney General Bonta, L.A. City Attorney
Feldstein Soto, Announce $500,000 Settlement
with Tilting Point Media for Illegally Collecting
and Sharing Children's Data." State of California
Department of Justice Office of the Attorney
General, June 18. https://oag.ca.gov/news/

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 190
press-releases/attorney-general-bonta-la-city-at-
torney-feldstein-soto-announce-500000.

Ohio Legislative Service Commission. 2025. “H.B.
200 136th General Assembly Bill Analysis." Office of
Research and Drafting, June 11. https://www.legis-
lature.ohio.gov/download?key=25563.

Okolo, Chinasa T., and Marie Tano. 2024.
“Closing the Gap: A Call for More Inclusive
Language Technologies." Brookings Institution,
December 12. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
closing-the-gap-a-call-for-more-inclusive-lan-
guage-technologies/.

Open Source Initiative. 2025. “Open Weights:

Not Quite What You've Been Told.” Open Source
Initiative, September 13. https://opensource.org/ai/
open-weights/.

OpenAl. 2025a. “Enterprise Privacy at OpenAl.”
OpenAl, September 15. https://openai.com/enter-
prise-privacy/.

OpenAl. 2025b. “Gpt-Oss-120b & Gpt-Oss-20b
Model Card.” OpenAl, August 5. https://openai.
com/index/gpt-oss-model-card/.

OpenAl. 2025c. “Introducing Parental Controls.”
OpenAl, September 16. https://openai.com/index/
introducing-parental-controls/.

OpenAl. 2025d. “Introducing Study Mode.” OpenAl,
September 30. https://openai.com/index/chatgpt-
study-mode/.

OpenAl. 2025e. “Pricing.” ChatGPT.
https://chatgpt.com/pricing/.

OpenAl. 2025f. “Privacy Policy.” Open Al, June 27.
https://openai.com/policies/row-privacy-policy/.

OpenAl. 2025g. "Why Language Models
Hallucinate.” OpenAl, September 5. https://openai.
com/index/why-language-models-hallucinate/.

OpenAl. n.d. “Data Controls in the OpenAl
Platform.” OpenAl. Accessed November 21, 2025.
https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/your-data.

OpenAl, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, et al.
2024. “GPT-4 Technical Report.” Preprint,
arXiv:2303.08774. March 4, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774.

OpenRouter. 2025. “OpenAl.” OpenRouter,
September 14. https://openrouter.ai/provider/ope-
nai.

O'Rourke, Meghan. 2025. “I Teach Creative
Writing. This Is What A.I. Is Doing to Students.” The
New York Times, July 18. https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/07/18/opinion/ai-chatgpt-school.html.

Osiurak, Frangois, Jordan Navarro, Emanuelle
Reynaud, and Gauthier Thomas. 2018. "Tools
Don't—and Won't—Make the Man: A Cognitive Look
at the Future.” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 147 (5): 782-88. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xge0000432.

Our World in Data. 2025. “Share of Total

Public Education Spending Allocated to

Staff Compensation.” Our World in Data,

May 1. https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/
staff-compensation-as-share-of-total-expendi-
ture-in-public-education-all-levels.

Ovsyannikova, Dariya, Victoria Oldemburgo de
Mello, and Michael Inzlicht. 2025. “Third-Party
Evaluators Perceive Al as More Compassionate
than Expert Humans.” Communications Psychology
3 (1): 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-
024-00182-6.

Pandit, Rupali, Ina Shastri, and Ajay Surana.

2025. “Design Thinking Approach to Developing
Empathetic, Reflective and Inclusive Learners in
K-12 Education: A Case Study.” Scope, 15 (02): 323-
351. https://scope-journal.com/assets/uploads/doc/
adfd7-323-351.280047.pdf.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

191
Park, Jungho. 2023. "A Case Study on Enhancing
the Expertise of Artificial Intelligence Education
for Pre-Service Teachers.” Preprints, No.
2023052006. May 29. https://doi.org/10.20944/
preprints202305.2006.v1.

Park, Peter S., Simon Goldstein, Aidan O'Gara,
Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. 2024. "Al
Deception: A Survey of Examples, Risks, and
Potential Solutions.” Patterns 5 (5): 100988.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2024.100988.

Patrinos, Harry, and Nobuyuki Tanaka. 2024.
“Education: Innovative Financing in Developing
Countries.” Education Working Paper No.1 (April).
World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/41476.

Patton, Michael Quinn. 2008. Utilization-Focused
Evaluation. 4th ed. Sage Publications.

Patwardhan, Tejal, Rachel Dias, Elizabeth Proehl,
et al. 2025. “GDP val: Evaluating Al Model
Performance on Real-World Economically Valuable
Tasks.” Preprint, arXiv:2510.04374, October 5,
2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.04374.

Pava, Juan N., Caroline Meinhardt, Haifa Badi Uz
Zaman, et al. 2025. Mind the (Language) Gap:
Mapping the Challenges of LLM Development

in Low-Resource Language Contexts. Stanford
University Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
White Paper. https://hai.stanford.edu/assets/files/
hai-taf-pretoria-white-paper-mind-the-language-
gap.pdf.

PBS: Firing Line with Margaret Hoover. 2025. “Fei-
Fei Li.” PBS, May 23. https://www.pbs.org/wnet/
firing-line/video/fei-fei-li-b2ic3j/.

Pearson. 2025. Al Study Tool: Student Outcomes
Report: Insights from Connections Academy Online
High School Students. Pearson. https://plc.pearson.
com/sites/pearson-corp/files/2025-08/ai-study-
tool-report.pdf.

Peele, Stanton, and Archie Brodsky. 1975. Love and
Addiction. Taplinger.

Pellegrino, James W., and Margaret L. Hilton, eds.
2012. Education for Life and Work: Developing
Transferable Knowleage and Skills in the 21st
Century. National Academies Press.

Pentina, Iryna, Tyler Hancock, and Tianling Xie.
2023. “Exploring Relationship Development with
Social Chatbots: A Mixed-Method Study of Replika.”
Computers in Human Behavior 140, 107600.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.107600.

Perkins, Mike, Leon Furze, Jasper Roe, and Jason
MacVaugh. 2024. "The Artificial Intelligence
Assessment Scale (AIAS): A Framework for
Ethical Integration of Generative Al in Educational
Assessment." Journal of University Teaching and
Learning Practice 21 (06). https://doi.org/10.53761/
q3azde36.

Pichai, Sundar. 2025. “Bringing the Best of Al to
College Students for Free.” Google (blog), August 6.
https://blog.google/products/gemini/google-ai-pro-
students-learning/.

Picton, Irene, Christina Clark, and Francesca
Bonefede. 2025. Young People’s Use of Generative
Al to Support Literacy in 2025. National Literacy
Trust. https://literacytrust.org.uk/research-services/
research-reports/young-people-and-teachers-use-
of-generative-ai-to-support-literacy-in-2025/.

Pollina, Elvira, and Alvise Armellini. 2024. “Italy
Fines OpenAl over ChatGPT Privacy Rules Breach.”
Reuters, December 20. https://www.reuters.com/
technology/italy-fines-openai-15-million-euros-
over-privacy-rules-breach-2024-12-20/.

Pontes, Danielle. 2024. “What Is BERT (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers)?”
Zilliz, August 30. https://zilliz.com/learn/what-is-
bert.

Postman, Neil. 1990. “Informing Ourselves to
Death.” Speech delivered to the German Informatics
Society. Stuttgart, October 11. https://web.williams.
edu/HistSci/curriculum/101/informing.html.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

192
Postman, Neil. 1995. The End of Education:
Redefining the Value of School. Knopf.

Potkalitsky, Nick. 2024. "Will Artificial Intelligence
Hit a Wall?” Persuasion (blog), December 16.
https://www.persuasion.community/p/will-artifi-
cial-intelligence-hit.

Prifti, Kostina, Jessica Morley, Claudio Novelli,
and Luciano Floridi. 2024. “Regulation by Design:
Features, Practices, Limitations, and Governance
Implications." Minds and Machines 34 (2).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-024-09675-z.

Project Liberty. 2025. “How to Address the Risks
of Al Companions." LinkedIn. https://www.linkedin.
com/pulse/how-address-risks-ai-companions-pro-
jectliberty-poghe/.

Pugh, Allison. 2024. The Last Human Job: The
Work of Connecting in a Disconnected World.
Princeton University Press.

Qiang, Christine Zhenwei, and He Wang. 2024.
“Who on Earth Is Using Generative Al?" World Bank
(blog), September 11. https://blogs.worldbank.org/
en/digital-development/who-on-earth-is-using-
generative-ai-.

Qin, Lixia, and Daniel H. Bowen. 2019. "The
Distributions of Teacher Qualification: A Cross-
National Study.” International Journal of
Educational Development 70 (October): 102084.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedudev.2019.102084.

Quezzaire, Pilar. 2025. “A Frank Chat(Bot) with Al:
Using Al for Genuine Inquiry.” Webinar. International
Baccalaureate Exchange Community Events, April
14. https://events.zoom.us/ev/AuGDfyc6bmc1AyM
JodDnquLScDrSdgcrdDGBz8tWDzatT Foi_DZiG~
AinMsnB60Bo45VGt_rcHixmlx3Q9c-yOgO3NK-
SKRItFd1laZAYp7goF Ejog.

Radboud Universiteit. 2025. “NOLAI." National
Education Lab Al, September 9. https://www.ru.nl/
en/nolai.

Raffoul, Amanda, Zachary J. Ward, Monique
Santoso, Jill R. Kavanaugh, and S. Bryn Austin.
2023. “Social Media Platforms Generate Billions
of Dollars in Revenue from U.S. Youth: Findings
from a Simulated Revenue Model.” PLoS ONE 18
(12): e0295337. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0295337.

Rahimi, Fatema, Abolghasem Sadeghi, and
Soo-Mi Choi. 2025. "Generative Al Meets Virtual
Reality: A Comprehensive Survey on Applications,
Challenges, and Future Direction." IEEE

Access 13: 94893-909. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2025.3574779.

Raine, Fernande, Susan Rivers, and Michelle Bertoli.
2025. Teen-centered civics for human thriving: A
new blueprint for learning and human flourishing.
History Co: Lab. https://staticl.squarespace.com/
static/628d83a9cae7f302fa52eb31/t/6903805117
7ff606434862c1/1761837137513/Teen-Centered-
Civics-Final.pdf.

Reed, Jon. 2025. “Congress Isn't Stepping Up to
Regulate Al. Where Does That Leave Us Now?”
CNET, July 22. https://www.cnet.com/tech/
services-and-software/congress-isnt-stepping-up-
to-regulate-ai-where-does-that-leave-us-now/.

Reeve, Johnmarshall, Richard M. Ryan, Sung
Hyeon Cheon, and Lennia Matos. 2022. Supporting
Students’ Motivation: Strategies for Success.
Routledge.

Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on
the Protection of Natural Persons with Regard to
the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free
Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive
95/ 46/ EC (General Data Protection Regulation),
Pub. L. No. L 119, 1 (2016).
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri= CELEX:32016R0679.

Reich, Justin. 2025. “What Past Education
Technology Failures Can Teach Us about the Future

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

193
of Al in Schools." The Conversation (blog), October
3. https://doi.org/10.64628/AAI.vvdntn96m.

Replika.ai. 2025. “Replika.” Replika.com, October
31. https://replika.com.

Reschly, Amy L., and Sandra L. Christenson,
eds. 2022. Handbook of Research on Student
Engagement. 2nd ed. Springer International
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
07853-8.

Rettberg, Jill Walker. 2022. ChatGPT Is Multilingual
but Monocultural, and It’s Learning Your Values.
Jilltxt (blog), December 6. https://jilltxt.net/
right-now-chatgpt-is-multilingual-but-monocultur-
al-but-its-learning-your-values/.

Reuters. 2025. “OpenAl's Weekly Active Users
Surpass 400 Million.” Reuters, February 20. https://
www.reuters.com/technology/artificial-intelligence/
openais-weekly-active-users-surpass-400-mil-
lion-2025-02-20/.

Ring, Hannah Reeves, and Amy R. West. 2015.
“Teacher Retention in Refugee and Emergency
Settings: The State of the Literature.” International
Education Journal: Comparative Perspectives 14
(3): 106-21.

Risko, Evan F., and Sam J. Gilbert. 2016. “Cognitive
Offloading.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20 (9):
676-88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.07.002.

Rithm Project. 2025. “About 2.” The Rithm Project,
October 31. https://www.therithmproject.org/about.

Rivers, Susan E., and Michelle C. Bertoli. 2024.
“Using Games to Ignite Teens’ Civic and Social
and Emotional Learning." Frontiers in Education 9

(April). https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2024.1322721.

RiverSide Learning Center. 2025. Impact
Assessment of Riverside Learning Centre's |
CAN Foundation Programme. https://www.riv-
ersidelearningcenter.in/files/School-offerings/
Report_impactstudy2025.pdf.

Robb, Michael B, and Supreet Mann. 2025. Talk,
Trust and Trade-Offs: How and Why Teens Use
Al Companions. Common Sense Media. https://
www.commonsensemedia.org/sites/default/files/
research/report/talk-trust-and-trade-offs_2025_
web.pdf.

Roberts, Tony, and Marjoke Oosterom. 2024.
“Digital Authoritarianism: A Systematic Literature
Review." Information Technology for Development 0
(0): 1-25. https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2024.24
25352.

Roblox. 2025a. “Roblox Creator Hub.” Roblox,
September 13. https://create.roblox.com.

Roblox. 2025b. “Roblox Launches New Learning
Hub to Engage Students Through Play.” Roblox, July
22. https://ir.roblox.com/news/news-details/2025/
Roblox-Launches-New-Learning-Hub-to-Engage-
Students-Through-Play/default.aspx.

Rocha, Natalie, and Kashmir Hill. 2025. “Character.
Al to Ban Children under 18 from Using Its
Chatbots.” The New York Times, October 29.
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/10/29/technology/
characterai-underage-users.html.

Roy, Palak, Helen Poet, Ruth Staunton, Katherine
Aston, and David Thomas. 2024. ChatGPT in
Lesson Preparation: A Teacher Choices Trial.
National Foundation for Educational Research.
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/chatgpt-in-les-
son-preparation-a-teacher-choices-trial/.

Ruiz, Pati, Kelly Mills, Keun-woo Lee, et al. 2024.
Al Literacy: A Framework to Understand, Evaluate,
and Use Emerging Technology. Digital Promise.
https://doi.org/10.51388/20.500.12265/218.

Ryan, R. M., and E. L. Deci. 2000. “Intrinsic and
Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Definitions and
New Directions.” Contemporary Educational
Psychology 25 (1): 54-67. https://doi.org/10.1006/
ceps.1999.1020.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

194
Safe Al for Children. 2024. “Al Risks to Children.”
The Safe Al For Children Alliance, October 23.
https://www.safeaiforchildren.org/risks-of-ai-for-
children/.

Safe and Sounds Schools. 2024. “Comprehensive
School Safety.” Safe and Sound. https://
www.safeandsoundschools.org/comprehen-
sive-school-safety.

Sartor, Giovanni, and Francesca Lagioia. 2020. The
Impact of the General Data Protection Regulation
on Artificial Intelligence. Publications Office of

the European Union. https://data.europa.eu/
doi/10.2861/293.

Sawyer, R. Keith, ed. 2014. The Cambridge
Handbook of the Learning Sciences. 2nd ed.
Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781139519526.

Science Direct. 2025. “Social Desirability Bias.”
Science Direct, September 29. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/topics/psychology/social-desir-
ability-bias.

Scragg, Sandy. 2025. “Al Academy Launches."
United Federation of Teachers, September 5.
https://www.uft.org/news/news-stories/
news-stories/ai-academy-launches.

Sengeh, David, and Rebecca Winthrop. 2022.
Transforming Education Systems: Why, What,

and How. Brookings Institution. https://www.
brookings.edu/articles/transforming-education-sys-
tems-why-what-and-how/.

Shanahan et al. v. IXL Learning, Inc, No.
24-6985 (9th Cir. files Nov. 19, 2024 2025).
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/
ShanahanAmicusBriefFiled.pdf.

Shieh, Evan, Faye-Marie Vassel, Cassidy Sugimoto,
and Thema Monroe-White. 2024. “Laissez-Faire
Harms: Algorithmic Biases in Generative Language
Models.” Preprint, arXiv:2404.07475, April 16, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2404.07475.

Silva, Elise. 2025. “University Students Feel
‘Anxious, Confused and Distrustful’ about Al
in the Classroom and among Their Peers.”
The Conversation (blog), July 16. https://doi.
org/10.64628/AAI.ukwpexkfr.

Sindermann, Cornelia, Nana Lochner, Rebecca
Heinzelmann, Christian Montag, and Roland W.
Scholz. 2024. "The Revenue Model of Mainstream
Online Social Networks and Potential Alternatives:
A Scenario-Based Evaluation by German
Adolescents and Adults." Technology in Society
77 (June): 102569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tech-
soc.2024.102569.

Singer, Natasha. 2025a. “Big Tech Makes Cal State
Its A.l. Training Ground.” The New York Times,
October 26. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/10/26/
technology/cal-state-ai-amazon-openai.html.

Singer, Natasha. 2025b. “Microsoft Pledges $4
Billion Toward A.I. Education.” The New York Times,
July 9. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/07/09/busi-
ness/microsoft-ai-education.html.

Singer, Natasha. 2025c. "OpenAl and Microsoft
Bankroll New A.I. Training for Teachers." The
New York Times, July 9. https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/07/08/technology/chatgpt-teach-
ers-openai-microsoft.html.

Slocum, Natalie. 2016. “What Is Personalized
Learning?” Education Domain Blog, February 17.
https://aurora-institute.org/blog/what-is-personal-
ized-learning/.

Snapchat. 2023. "SPS 2023: What's Next for My
Al." Snapchat. https://newsroom.snap.com/sps-
2023-whats-next-for-my-ai.

Snapchat. 2025. "Early Insights on My Al.”
Snapchat, September 12. https://newsroom.snap.
com/early-insights-on-my-ai.

Southern Regional Education Board (SREB).
2025. “Al Tool Procurement, Implementation and
Evaluation Checklist." SREB. https://www.sreb.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

195
org/publication/ai-tool-procurement-implementa-
tion-and-evaluation-checklist.

Sparrow, Betsy, Jenny Liu, and Daniel M. Wegner.
2011. "Google Effects on Memory: Cognitive
Consequences of Having Information at Our
Fingertips." Science 333 (6043): 776-78.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1207745.

Spencer, Michael and Wyndo. 2025. "The
Loneliness Economy of Al." Al Supremacy (blog),
May 20. https://www.ai-supremacy.com/p/
the-loneliness-economy-of-ai.

Srinivasan, Venkat, and Hemavathi Murthy. 2021.
“Improving Reading and Comprehension in K-12:
Evidence from a Large-Scale Al Technology
Intervention in India." Computers and Education:
Artificial Intelligence 2 (January): 100019.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100019.

Staff in the Office of Technology. 2024.

“Al Companies: Uphold Your Privacy and
Confidentiality Commitments.” Federal Trade
Commission, January 9. https://www.ftc.gov/pol-
icy/advocacy-research/tech-at-ftc/2024/01/
ai-companies-uphold-your-privacy-confidentiali-
ty-commitments.

Stasenko, Anastasia, Cormac O'Keefe, and Pierre-
Carl Langlais. 2025. “Beyond the Hype: Building
Equitable and Sustainable Al for Social Impact.”
Bibliotheques Sans Frontiéres, White Paper,
October 15. https://www.bibliosansfrontieres.org/
wp-content/uploads/2025/04/White-paper-lA-
Advocacy-for-frugal-equitable-l|A-042025.pdf.

Statista. 2025. “Most Used Languages Online by
Share of Websites 2025.” Statista. https://www.
statista.com/statistics/262946/most-common-lan-
guages-on-the-internet/.

Steiner, Elizabeth D., Ashley Woo, and Sy Doan.
2023. All Work and No Pay—Teachers’ Perceptions
of Their Pay and Hours Worked: Findings from

the 2023 State of the American Teacher Survey.

Rand. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
RRA1108-9.html.

Steiss, Jacob, Tamara Tate, Steve Graham, et

al. 2024. “Comparing the Quality of Human and
ChatGPT Feedback of Students’ Writing.” Learning
and Instruction 91 (June): 101894.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2024.101894.

Stern, Joanna. 2025. “I Recorded Everything | Said
for Three Months. Al Has Replaced My Memory.”
The Wall Street Journal, April 30. https://www.
wsj.com/tech/personal-tech/ai-personal-assis-
tant-wearable-tech-impressions-28156b57.

Su, Yipeng, and Anna Morgan. 2024. Promoting
Rural Financial Well-Being and Inclusion. Urban
Institute. https://www.urban.org/sites/default/
files/2024-05/Promoting_Rural_Financial_Well-
Being_Inclusion.pdf.

Sweller, John. 1988. “Cognitive Load During
Problem Solving: Effects on Learning." Cognitive
Science 12 (2): 257-85. https://doi.org/10.1207/
$15516709c0g1202_4.

Tang, Xin, Katja Upadyaya, Hiroyuki Toyama,

Mika Kasanen, and Katariina Salmela-Aro. 2023.
“Assessing and Tracking Students’ Wellbeing
Through an Automated Scoring System: School Day
Wellbeing Model." In Al in Learning: Designing the
Future, edited by Hannele Niemi, Roy D. Pea, and
Yu Lu. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-09687-7.

Teach Access. 2025. "Where Al Meets
Accessibility: Considerations for Higher
Education.” Every Learner Everywhere.
https://www.everylearnereverywhere.org/
resources/where-ai-meets-accessibility-consider-
ations-for-higher-education/.

TeachAl. 2025. "TeachAl.” TeachAl.
https://www.teachai.org/toolkit.

Teacher Task Force. 2025. “Home.” Teacher Task
Force, October 20. https://teachertaskforce.org/

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

196
news/teachers-heart-education-recovery-what-
does-latestdata-tell-us-about-state-worlds-
teachers.

Tech Justice Law Project. 2025. “TJLP, Young
People’s Alliance, and Encode File FTC Complaint
Over Al Chatbot App Replika's Deceptive Practices,
Seek FTC Investigation." Tech Justice Law Project,
February 1. https://techjusticelaw.org/2025/01/31/
tjlp-young-peoples-alliance-and-encode-file-ftc-
complaint-over-ai-chatbot-app-replikas-deceptive-
practices-seek-ftc-investigation/.

Thompson, Derek. 2025. "The End of Thinking.”
Derek Thompson (blog), July 9. https://www.derek-
thompson.org/p/the-end-of-thinking.

Tiku, Nitasha. 2024. “An Al Companion Suggested
He Kill His Parents. Now His Mom Is Suing.” The
Washington Post, December 10. https://www.
washingtonpost.com/technology/2024/12/10/char-
acter-ai-lawsuit-teen-kill-parents-texas/.

Trabelsi, Wess. 2025. "The Good, the Bad, and
the Ugly Science of Al in Education.” Wesstrabelsi
(blog), March 7. https://wesstrabelsi.substack.
com/p/the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly-science.

Truong, Nguyen, Kai Sun, Siyao Wang, Florian
Guitton, and YiKe Guo. 2021. “Privacy Preservation
in Federated Learning: An Insightful Survey from
the GDPR Perspective.” Computers & Security

110 (November): 102402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2021.102402.

Tunyasuvunakool, Kathryn, Jonas Adler, Zachary
Wu, et al. 2021. “Highly Accurate Protein Structure
Prediction for the Human Proteome.” Nature 596
(7873): 590-96. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-03828-1.

Turkle, Sherry. 2024. “Who Do We Become When
We Talk to Machines?" An MIT Exploration of
Generative Al (March). https://doi.org/10.21428/
e4baedd9.caal0d84.

Turner. 2022. “The National Education Lab Al
(NOLAI)." Turner, October 17. https://www.turner.nl/
en/education/the-national-education-lab-ai-nolai/.

Turner, Amy, Meena Kaushik, Mu-Ti Huang,

and Srikar Varanasi. 2022. Calibrating Trust in
Al-Assisted Decision Making. UC Berkeley School
of Information. https://www.ischool.berkeley.edu/
sites/default/files/sproject_attachments/humanai_
capstonereport-final.pdf.

Twenge, Jean M., Jonathan Haidt, Andrew B.
Blake, Cooper McAllister, Hannah Lemon, and
Astrid Le Roy. 2021. “Worldwide Increases in
Adolescent Loneliness.” Journal of Adolescence 93
(December): 257-69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ado-
lescence.2021.06.006.

Tyack, David, and William Tobin. 1994. "The
‘Grammar’ of Schooling: Why Has It Been So Hard
to Change?" American Educational Research
Journal 31 (3): 453-79.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1163222.

UNESCO. 2022. Transforming Education

from within: Current Trends in the Status and
Development of Teachers; World Teachers’ Day
2022. UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000383002/PDF/383002eng.pdf.
multi.

UNESCO. 2023. Global Education Monitoring
Report 2023: Technology in Education: A Tool on
Whose Terms? UNESCO. https://digitallibrary.
un.org/record/4020460.

UNESCO. 2024. Global Education Monitoring
Report 2024/5. UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.
org/ark:/48223/pf0000391758/PDF/391758eng.pdf.
multi.

UNESCO. 2025. New UNESCO Report

Calls for Multilingual Education to Unlock
Learning and Inclusion. UNESCO, February
18. https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/
new-unesco-report-calls-multilingual-educa-
tion-unlock-learning-and-inclusion.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

197
UNESCO Institute for Statistics and Education
for All Global Monitoring Report. 2014. “Wanted:
Trained Teachers to Ensure Every Child's Right to
Primary Education." UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000229913.

UNESCO and International Task Force on Teachers
for Education 2030. 2024. Global Report on
Teachers: Addressing Teacher Shortages and
Transforming the Profession. UNESCO.
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000388832.

UNICEF Office of Global Insight and Policy. 2021.
“Al Guide for Parents 2021." UNICEF.
https://www.unicef.org/innocenti/media/1361/file/
UNICEF -Global-Insight-Al % 20guide% 20for%20
parents-2021.pdf.

UNICEF-UNESCO. 2025. Nifias, Nifios y
Adolescentes Conectados, Informe General de
Resultados. UNICEF Argentina.
https://www.unicef.org/argentina/media/24916/
file/NI%C3%91AS, %20NI%C3%I10S %20Y %20
ADOLESCENTES%20CONECTADOS%20
%20KIDS%20ONLINE%20ARGENTINA%20
Informe%20de%20resultados.pdf.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
2025. "Hamburg Declaration on Responsible

Al: Global Leaders Commit to Responsible

Al for Sustainable Development.” UNDP.
https://www.bmz-digital.global/wp-content/
uploads/2025/06/250603_Hamburg_Declaration.
pdf.

United Nations Population Division. 2025.
“Population by Age and Sex—Broad Age Groups.”
Data Portal: Population Division, October 15. https://
population.un.org/dataportal/data/indicators/70/
locations/4,903,8,12,16,5505,20,24,660,28,32,51,533,
935,36,9271834,40,31,44,48,50,52,112,56,84,204,6
0,64,68,535,70,72,76,92,96,100,854,108,132,116,120,
124,915,136,140,916,1831,5500,148,152,156,344, 446, -
158,170,174,178,184,188,384,191,192,531,196, 203,408
180,208,901,902,948,262,212,214,910,1832,906,92
3,218,818, 222,226,232,233,748,231,908,1829,5502,

238,234,242,246,250,254,258,266,270,268,276,28
8,292,300,304,308,5540,5543,5541,5538,5542,553
7,5547,5548,5551,5549,5546,5550,5545,5555,5556,
5559,5557,5554,5558,5553,312,316,320,831,324,62
4,328,332,5503,1503,340,348,352,356,360,364,36
8,372,833,376,380,388,392,832,400,398, 404,296,
412,414,417,968,418,904,428,941,422,426,934,430
,434,438,440,2087,2088,2089,2090,5504,1859,150
0,1501,442,450,454,458,462,466,470,584,474,478,
480,175,928, 484,954,583,911,1517,492,496,499,500
,504,508,104,516,520,524,528,540,554,558,562,566
,570,1518,807,912,1833,905,924,580,578,909,1835,5
12,1401,586,585,591,598,600,604,608,616,957,620,6
30,634,410,498,638,642,643,646,652,654,659,662
,663,666,670,882,674,678,682,686,688,690,2093,2
091,2092,694,702,534,703,705,961,90,706,710,931,-
728,920,913,5501,925,724,144,275,947,729,740,752
,756,760,762,764,626,768,772,776,780,788,792,795
,796,798,800,804,784,826,834,840,850,1502,858,8
60,548,862 ,704,876,914,922,926,732,900,887,894,
716/start/1990/end/2025/table/pivotbylocation.

United Nations Sustainable Development

Group (UNSDG). 2024. "Assistive Technology
Can Revolutionize Development, Learning and
Participation: It's Time Children Everywhere Have
Access.” UNSDG, July 25. https://unsdg.un.org/
latest/stories/assistive-technology-can-revo-
lutionize-development-learning-and-participa-
tion-itHE2%80%99s.

United Nations Sustainable Development
Group (UNSDG). 2025. "Decoding Africa's
Energy Journey: Three Key Numbers." UNSDG,
January 27. https://unsdg.un.org/latest/stories/
decoding-africa%E2%80%99s-energy-jour-
ney-three-key-numbers.

University of California at Davis. 2025. “Peer & Al
Review + Reflection (PAIRR).” UC Davis University
Writing Program, February 14. https://writing.ucda-
vis.edu/pairr.

U.S. Department of Education. 2025. "FERPA." U.S.
Department of Education, November 19.
https://studentprivacy.ed.gov/ferpa.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

198
Office of the Surgeon General (OSG). 2023.

Our Epidemic of Loneliness and Isolation: The
U.S. Surgeon General's Advisory on the Healing
Effects of Social Connection and Community. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
https://www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/books/NBK595227/.

UXPin. 2023. “What Is Progressive Disclosure?
Show & Hide the Right Information." Studio by
UXPin, March 13. https://www.uxpin.com/studio/
blog/what-is-progressive-disclosure/.

Vegas, Emiliana and Rebecca Winthrop. 2020.
"2020: A Year of Turmoil but Also Hope in
Education.” Brookings Institution, December 22.
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/2020-a-year-
of-turmoil-but-also-hope-in-education/.

Veinott, Beth, Gary A. Klein, and Sterling Wiggins.
2010. “Evaluating the Effectiveness of the
PreMortem Technique on Plan Confidence.”
Proceedings of the 7th International |SCRAM
Conference, May 9. https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/266485127_Evaluating_the_
Effectiveness_of_the_PreMortem_Technique_on_
Plan_Confidence.

Veltman, Chloe. 2025. “Ahead of the Holidays,
Consumer and Child Advocacy Groups Warn
against Al Toys.” NPR, November 20. https://www.
npr.org/2025/11/20/nx-s1-5612689/ai-toys.

Venditti, Bruno. 2025. “Ranked: Internet Costs

by Country in 2025." Visual Capitalist, October 2.
https://www.visualcapitalist.com/internet-costs-by-
country-in-2025/.

Vermont Act No. 63 (2025). https://legislature.ver-
mont.gov/bill/status/2026/S.69.

Violino, Bob. 2025. “Generative Al like ChatGPT

Is at Risk of Creating New Gender Gap at Work."
CNBC, May 8. https://www.cnbc.com/2025/05/08/
ai-risk-chatgpt-gender-gap-jobs-work.html.

Vita-Barrull, Nuria, Veronica Estrada-Plana, Jaume
March-Llanes, et al. 2023. "Board Game-Based

Intervention to Improve Executive Functions and
Academic Skills in Rural Schools: A Randomized
Controlled Trial." Trends in Neuroscience and
Education 33 (December): 100216. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tine.2023.100216.

Voice 21. 2025. “Home.” Voice 21, October 26.
https://voice21.org/.

Wahn, Basil, Laura Schmitz, Frauke Nora Gerster,
and Matthias Weiss. 2023. “Offloading under
Cognitive Load: Humans Are Willing to Offload
Parts of an Attentionally Demanding Task to an
Algorithm.” PLoS ONE 18 (5): e€0286102. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0286102.

Wall Street Journal. 2019. “Under Al's Watchful Eye,
China Wants to Raise Smarter Students.” The Wall
Street Journal, September 19. https://www.wsj.com/
video/series/in-depth-features/under-ais-watch-
ful-eye-china-wants-to-raise-smarter-students/
(C4294BAB-A76B-4569-8D09-32E9F2B62D19?mod=WS Jvidet_
pos2.

Impact Research. 2024. Al Chatbots in

Schools: Findings from a Poll of K-12

Teachers, Students, Parents. and College
Undergraduates. Walton Family Foundation,

May. https://static.waltonfamilyfoundation.
org/bf/24/cd3646584af89e7c668c7705a006/
deck-impact-analysis-national-schools-tech-track-
er-may-2024-1.pdf.

Walton Family Foundation. 2025. “The Al Dividend:
New Survey Shows Al Is Helping Teachers Reclaim
Valuable Time." Walton Family Foundation, June
25. https://www.waltonfamilyfoundation.org/
the-ai-dividend-new-survey-shows-ai-is-helping-
teachers-reclaim-valuable-time.

Walton, Gregory M., Mary C. Murphy, Christine
Logel, et al. 2023. "Where and with Whom Does
a Brief Social-Belonging Intervention Promote
Progress in College?” Science 380 (6644): 499-
505. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ade4420.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

199
Wan, Zijun, Jiawei Tang, Linghang Cai, Xin Tong,
and Can Liu. 2024. “Breaking the Midas Spell:
Understanding Progressive Novice-Al Collaboration
in Spatial Design." Preprint, arXiv:2410.20124,
October 26, 2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2410.20124.

Wang, Chaoran. 2025. "Exploring Students’
Generative Al-Assisted Writing Processes:
Perceptions and Experiences from Native and
Nonnative English Speakers.” Technology,
Knowledge and Learning 30 (3): 1825-46.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10758-024-09744-3.

Wang, Rose E., Ana T. Ribeiro, Carly D. Robinson,
Susanna Loeb, and Dora Demszky. 2025. “Tutor
CoPilot: A Human-Al Approach for Scaling Real-
Time Expertise.” Preprint, arXiv:2410.03017,
January 26, 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2410.03017.

Wangdi, Thinley, and Ringphami Shimray. 2025.
"Al-Powered ReadTheory as a Self-Access
Learning Platform to Enhance EFL Learners’
Reading Enjoyment and Comprehension Skills: A
Posthumanist Perspective.” Studies in Self-Access
Learning Journal 16 (2). https://sisaljournal.org/
archives/volume-16/jun25/wangdi_shimray/.

Washington Office of Superintendent of Public
Instruction. 2024. “Human-Centered Al: Guidance
for K-12 Public Schools." Washington Office of
Superintendent of Public Instruction, January 18.
https://ospi.k12.wa.us/sites/default/files/2024-08/
comprehensive-ai-guidance-accessible-format_0.
pdf.

Watkins, Marc. 2025. “Can We Justify College?”
Rhetorica (blog), October 31. https://marcwatkins.
substack.com/p/can-we-justify-college.

Weaver, D’Andre J. 2022. Delivering on the Promise
of Digital Equity. Digital Promise. https://doi.
org/10.51388/20.500.12265/166.

Webb, Norman L. 2002. Mathematics Depth-of-
Knowleage Levels. https://www.modelteaching.
com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/D Ok-levels.pdf.

Weiner, Steven, Robin Lake, and Jessica Rosner.
2024. Al Is Evolving, but Teacher Prep Is Lagging:
A First Look at Teacher Preparation Program
Responses to Al. Center on Reinventing Public
Education. https://crpe.org/ai-is-evolving-but-
teacher-prep-is-lagging/.

Weissberger, Alan. 2025. “Sources: Al Is Getting
Smarter, but Hallucinations Are Getting Worse."
IEE Communications Society Technology Blog,
May 10. https://techblog.comsoc.org/2025/05/10/
nyt-ai-is-getting-smarter-but-hallucinations-are-
getting-worse/.

West, Amy, and Hannah Ring. 2015.
“Underresourced, Undervalued, and Underutilized:
Making the Case for Teachers in Refugee and
Emergency Contexts.” The International Education
Journal: Comparative Perspectives 14: 150-64.

West, Mark. 2023. An Ed-Tech Tragedy?
Educational Technologies and School Closures in
the Time of COVID-19. UNESCO. https://unesdoc.
unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000386701.

White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy. 2022. “Blueprint for an Al Bill of Rights.” The
White House. https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.
gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights/.

Wilkins, Joe. 2025. “OpenAl Usage Plummets in
the Summer, When Students Aren't Cheating on
Homework.” Futurism, August 8. https://futurism.
com/openai-use-cheating-homework.

Willingham, Daniel. 2021. Why Don’t Students Like
School?: A Cognitive Scientist Answers Questions
About How the Mind Works and What It Means for
the Classroom. 2nd Ed. Wiley.

Winsome Marketing Writing Team. 2025. “The
$250 Stratification: How Google Al Ultra Reveals
the Coming Al Class Divide.” Winsome Marketing,

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

200
September 15. https://winsomemarketing.com/
ai-in-marketing/the-250-stratification-how-google-
ai-ultra-reveals-the-coming-ai-class-divide.

Winthrop, Rebecca, and Eileen McGivney. 2015.
Why Wait 100 Years? Bridging the Gap in Global
Education. Brookings Institution. https://www.
brookings.edu/articles/why-wait-100-years-bridg-
ing-the-gap-in-global-education/.

Winthrop, Rebecca, Adam Barton, and Eileen
McGivney. 2018. Leapfrogging Inequality. Brookings
Institution Press.

Winthrop, Rebecca. 2020. The Need for Civic
Education in 21st-Century Schools. The Brookings
Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/04/BrookingsPolicy2020_Bigldeas_
Winthrop_CivicEducation.pdf.

Winthrop, Rebecca, Adam Barton, Mahsa Ershadi,
and Lauren Ziegler. 2021. Collaborating to
Transform and Improve Education Systems: A
Playbook for Family-School Engagement. Brookings
Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
collaborating-to-transform-and-improve-educa-
tion-systems-a-playbook-for-family-school-en-
gagement/.

Winthrop, Rebecca, Youssef Shoukry, and David
Nitkin. 2025. The Disengagement Gap: Why
Student Engagement Isn't What Parents Expect.
Brookings Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/
articles/the-disengagement-gap/.

Wolf, Maryanne. 2018. Reader Come Home: The
Reading Brain in a Digital World. Harper Collins
Publishers.

Wood, Stacy. 2020. “Kids and the Screen-Time
Black Hole.” Journal of Consumer Research,
December 30. http://dqo.xzm.temporary.site/
adam-alter-irresistable.

World Bank. 2023. "World Bank Open Data: Free
and Open Access to Global Development Data.”
World Bank Open Data. https://data.worldbank.org.

World Bank Group. 2023. “From Connectivity to
Services: Digital Transformation in Africa.” World
Bank, June 27. https://projects.worldbank.org/
en/results/2023/06/27/from-connectivity-to-ser-
vices-digital-transformation-in-africa.

World Bank Group. 2025. Tracking SDG 7—The
Energy Progress Report 2025. World Bank, June
20. https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/energy/
publication/tracking-sdg-7-the-energy-progress-
report-2025.

World Economic Forum. 2022. Artificial Intelligence
for Children. World Economic Forum Toolkit, March
2022. https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_
Artificial_Intelligence_for_Children_2022.pdf.

World Health Organization and UNICEF. 2022.
“Almost One Billion Children and Adults with
Disabilities and Older Persons in Need of Assistive
Technology Denied Access, According to New
Report." World Health Organization, May 16.
https://www.who.int/news/item/16-05-2022-al-
most-one-billion-children-and-adults-with-disabili-
ties-and-older-persons-in-need-of-assistive-tech-
nology-denied-access--according-to-new-report.

World Possible. 2025. “World Possible’s RACHEL
Server.” World Possible. https://worldpossible.org/.

Worth, Jack, Sarah Lynch, Jude Hillary, Connie
Rennie, and Joana Andrade. 2018. Teacher
Workforce Dynamics in England. National
Foundation for Educational Research.

Xiao, Ping, Yuanyuan Chen, and Weining Bao. 2023.
“Waiting, Banning, and Embracing: An Empirical
Analysis of Adapting Policies for Generative Al in
Higher Education.” Preprint, arXiv:2305.18617, May
25, 2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.18617.

Young People's Alliance, Encode, and Tech Justice
Law Project (YPA). 2024. “Deceptive and Unfair
Marketing and Design Practices on Replika."

YPA, Tech Justice Law Project, and Encode,
January 28. https://techjusticelaw.org/wp-content/

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

201
uploads/2025/01/Complaint-and-Petition-for- Sequencing and Machine Learning.” Nature
Investigation-Re-Replika.pdf. Communications 16 (1): 6272.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61280-5.

Youth in Al. 2025. “Youth in Al Summit.: Al for a

Sustainable Future: Empowering Youth to Drive Zimmerman, Barry J. 2011. “Motivational Sources

Global Impact.” Youth in Al. https://youthinai.org/. and Outcomes of Self-Regulated Learning and
Performance." In Handbook of Self-Regulation
Yu, Yaman, Yiren Liu, Jacky Zhang, Yun Huang, and of Learning and Performance, edited by Barry J.

Yang Wang. 2025. “Understanding Generative Al Zimmerman and Dale H. Schunk. Routledge/Taylor

Risks for Youth: A Taxonomy Based on Empirical & Francis.
Data.” Preprint, arXiv:2502.16383, February 25,
2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.16383.

Yuan, Ziying, Xiaoliang Cheng, and Yujing Duan.
2024. “Impact of Media Dependence: How
Emotional Interactions between Users and Chat
Robots Affect Human Socialization?” Frontiers in
Psychology 15 (August): 1388860.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1388860.

Zamora, Gigi. 2023. "Gates Foundation Allocates
$30 Million Towards Advancing Al In Africa.”
Forbes, October 10. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
gigizamora/2023/10/10/gates-foundation-allo-
cates-30-million-towards-advancing-ai-in-africa/.

Zao-Sanders, Marc. 2025. "How People Are Really
Using Gen Al in 2025." Harvard Business Review,
April 9. https://hbr.org/2025/04/how-people-are-
really-using-gen-ai-in-2025.

Zhao, Sihang, Shoucong Carol Xiong, Bo Pang,
Xiaoying Tang, and Pinjia He. 2025. “Let Al Read
First: Enhancing Reading Abilities for Individuals
with Dyslexia through Artificial Intelligence.”
Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York), CHI EA '25, April 25, 1-16.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3706599.3720113.

Zhou, Viola. 2025. "Al Is Reshaping Childhood in
China.” Rest of World, October 1. https://restof-
world.org/2025/ai-china-childhood/.

Zhuang, Xiaowei, Van Vo, Michael A. Moshi, et
al. 2025. “Early Detection of Emerging SARS-
CoV-2 Variants from Wastewater through Genome

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

202
ANNEX A:
Example Al literacy frameworks

Year
Created

Developers

Education
Level

Definition
of Al
Literacy

AILit
Framework

2025

European Com-
mission (EC),
Organization

for Economic
Co-operation

and Development
(OECD), Code.org,
other experts

Primary and
secondary educa-
tion settings

“The technical
knowledge, durable
skills, and future-
ready attitudes
required to thrive
in a world influ-
enced by Al. It
enables learners
to engage, create
with, manage, and
design Al, while
critically evalu-
ating its benefits,
risks, and ethical
implications."

Digital
Promise

2024

Digital Promise

K-12 education (i.e.,
early childhood to
the end of second-
ary school)

“The knowledge
and skills that
enable people to
critically under-
stand, evaluate,
and use Al systems
and tools to safely
and effectively
participate in an
increasingly digi-
tal world.”

China's General

Al Education
Guide

2025

China's Ministry
of Education

Primary and sec-
ondary schools

Uruguay's Marco
referencial para la
ensefanza de la
inteligencia arti-
ficial (Reference
Framework for
Teaching Al)

2024

Ceibal (digital
education trans-
formation initiative
in Uruguay)

K-12 education

Builds off the 2020
framework devel-
oped by Long

& Magerko

“A set of compe-
tencies that allows
people to know and
critically evaluate Al
technologies, use Al
tools, communicate
and collaborate with
Al, and also pro-
mote different ways
of thinking that
potentially allow
creating with Al.”

2021

MIT RAISE (Respon-
sible Al for Social
Empowerment and
Education)

K-12 education

“Includes...the
appropriate and
productive use of
Al, as well as...how
Al-powered tech-
nologies operate
and their applica-
tions..., drawbacks
and possibilities

of [Al], and inves-
tigations of its
societal and ethical
impacts...applica-
tions of Al and [how
to] interact with it
naturally...[and] how
Alis relevant in stu-
dents’ lives beyond
computer science
classrooms.”

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

203
AILit
Framework

Domains of
Al Literacy:

Structure

1) engaging with Al
2) creating with Al
3) managing Al
4) designing Al

This framework
complements the
EU's 2022 ethical
guidelines on the
use of artificial
intelligence (Al) and
data in teaching
and learning. These
guidelines require
that Al systems
used in education
must have human
agency and over-
sight; transparency;
diversity, non-dis-
crimination, and
fairness; societal
and environmen-
tal well-being;
privacy and data
governance; tech-
nical robustness
and safety; and
accountability.

Relevant
Guardrails

Digital
Promise

Al Literacy
Practices:

1) algorithmic think-
ing, abstraction &
decomposition

2) data analysis
& inference

3) data privacy
& security

4) digital com-
munication &
expression

5) ethics & impact

6) informa-
tion & mis/
disinformation

Digital Promise
recommends guide-
lines and policies
that promote the
responsible use

of Al inside and
outside school,
and urge edu-
cators to ensure
students’ personal
data is protected
and caregivers are
communicated with
about Al tool use
at school.

China's General

Al Education
Guide

Al Education Goals:

1) cognition
2) skills

3) thinking
4) values

China's Ministry of
Education suggests
gradual progression
of Al use, with lower
grades exercising
less use than higher
grades. Primary
level students are
not allowed to use
open-ended content
generation tools
without supervision.
Teachers are pro-
hibited from relying
on Al to answer stu-
dent questions or
evaluate students.
The MOE also
require guardrails

to protect personal
data and ensure
data security with Al
tools in schools.

Uruguay's Marco
referencial para la
ensefanza de la
inteligencia arti-
ficial (Reference
Framework for
Teaching Al)

Dimensions:

1) what is Al?
2) computa-
tional learning
3) knowledge
representation
4) computational
approach with Al
5) use and
social impact

This framework
does not promote
specific, policy-ori-
ented guardrails,
but it does encour-
age teacher-led
implementation of
Al Literacy lessons.

Outside of this

framework, Uruguay

has data protection
laws and a national
Al strategy that
focus on mitigating
risks, but they do
not focus specifi-
cally on children or
Alin education.

Categories of Units:

1) Alliteracy
foundations

2) Al applications

3) going beyond
Al literacy (data
activism, creativ-
ity, programming)

While Day of Al's
curriculum itself
doesn't have guard-
rails built-in, the
Day of Al organi-
zation will assist
school leaders and
regulators to create
Al policies for

their schools.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

204
Uruguay's Marco
referencial para la

P ach China's General ensefanza de la
AILit Digital . "een . 9
Froearie Peerniee Al Education inteligencia arti-
Guide ficial (Reference
Framework for
Teaching Al)
Time with Balanced Heavy emphasis on | Age-based pro- Lean toward Balanced
Tech blend of Al and hands-on Al use gression of Al use hands-on Al use blend of Al and
offline learning offline learning
While the elements | While China While this frame-
While this frame- of this framework requires that stu- work intentionally While this frame-
work does include that focus on dents, beginning includes both work does include
hands-on engage- understanding and at age 6, receive conceptual and eth- | hands-on engage-
ment with Al tools, evaluating Al may at least 8 hours ical Al literacy with ment with Al tools,
several of its not always require of Al education hands-on engage- several of its
lessons focus on direct engagement a year, this guid- ment with Al tools, it lessons focus on
foundational skills with Al tools, the ance indicates that promotes “learning foundational skills
that can be imple- bulk of the com- students in lower by doing,” making that can be imple-
mented without Al petencies and grades should hands-on use of Al | mented without Al
technologies. example lessons in | gain awareness of tools a core compo- | technologies.
this framework do Al, while students nent of this model.
involve hands-on in higher grades
interaction should move to
with Al tools. using and creating

Al through proj-
ect-based learning.

Source (European Com- (Ruiz et al. 2024) (Australian Govern- | (Capdehourat (Day of Al 2025)
mission and ment Department of | et al. 2024)
OECD 2025) Education 2025)

KEY THEMES ACROSS ALL FRAMEWORKS

While these six Al Literacy frameworks are all unique and structured differently, there are many things they
have in common. All six frameworks:

1. Include a focus on understanding what Al is and how it works
2. Includes lessons on ethics in Al
3. Include hands-on use with Al tools (though the frequency and type of use differs by framework)

More detail on each framework can be found below:
The AILit Framework, currently in draft form and eliciting feedback, outlines four domains of Al Literacy:

“Engaging with Al," “Creating with Al," “Managing Al," and “Designing Al." Each domain refers to how
Alis used:

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 205
« “Engaging with Al" involves using Al as a tool to access information

* "Creating with Al” involves collaborating with Al in creative or problem-solving processes
« “Managing Al" refers to using Al (selectively) as a tool to enhance human work

* "Designing Al" involves shaping how Al systems function

Ethical considerations are embedded across all four domains. For example, “Creating with Al” involves
considerations around content ownership and attribution, while "Managing Al” involves assessing
whether Al's role aligns with a user's goals and values. The AILit Framework emphasizes that Al literacy is
comprised of knowledge, skills, and attitudes. Each of the framework's 22 competencies, which extend
across the four domains, is meant to grow and develop specific knowledge, skills, and attitudes of
learners. The framework provides example primary and secondary lessons for each of its competencies.

Example lessons in the AILit Framework:

Domain: Creating with Al Domain: Managing Al
Competency: Collaborate with generative Al Competency: Decide whether to use Al
systems to elicit feedback, refine results, and systems based on the nature of the task.
reflect on thought processes. Knowledge: (1) Al excels at pattern recognition
Knowledge: Al systems gather new data from and automation but lacks emotions, ethical
interactions with users; decisions, processes, reasoning, context, and originality. (2)
and outputs may be directly influenced by Ethical Al design encompasses fairness,
inputs in real time. transparency, explainability, accountability,
Skills: computational thinking, creativity respect for privacy, and legal compliance.
Attitudes: innovative, adaptable Skills: problem solving, computational thinking
Lesson (secondary grades): Use an Al coding Attitudes: responsible, innovative
assistant to fix errors and modify code for Lesson (primary grades): Consider everyday
a video game, then reflect on how the tool tasks (e.g., writing a birthday card) and assess
affected the debugging process. when AI use is appropriate, considering

the need for individuality, creativity, or

human judgment.

The Digital Promise Framework defines three modes of engagement for Al literacy: understand, evaluate,
and use. These are interconnected, demonstrating that engaging with Al in these three ways together
leads to robust Al literacy. To understand Al, this framework suggests instruction on the history of Al,
how it works, and how it's being used. To evaluate Al, this framework emphasizes centering human
judgement and justice, concepts that serve as baselines for how and why we should evaluate and be
critical consumers of Al tools. To demonstrate students’ ability to understand and evaluate Al, this model
describes 6 Al literacy practices:

¢ Algorithmic thinking, abstraction, & decomposition
« Data analysis & inference

« Data privacy & security

* Digital communication & expression

« Ethics & impact

¢ Information & mis/disinformation

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 206
Digital Promise also outlines three different types of educational Al use: interact, create, and problem-
solve. For each use type, they provide examples of how students may apply the literacy practices.

Example applications of Digital Promise’s Al literacy practices:

Interacting with Al:
Algorithmic thinking,
abstraction & decomposition
Understand how Al

tools make automated
recommendations and how to
influence recommendations
for specific goals.

Digital communication &
expression

Responsibly engage with

and share Al-influenced or
Al-created content online.

Creating with Al:

Ethics & impact

Consider how your creation
aligns to personal values/
ethics. Ensure appropriate
and ethical application of
synthetic content (e.g. citing
appropriately, mitigating
harm of deep fakes, etc.).
Become aware of the
impact of consumption of
GenAl-created content on
self, others, environment,
and society.

Information & mis/
disinformation

Identify mis/disinformation
in synthesized outputs/
products. Evaluate whether
you are perpetuating false
information when creating
(e.g. do not include mis/
disinformation in prompts).

Problem Solving With Al:
Data analysis & inference
Evaluate the sources,
contexts, and organization of
data on which the algorithm
is trained.

Data privacy & security
Consider what personal
identifiable information (PII)
or sensitive data you are
collecting in your approach
to problem solving and

how to protect user privacy
and security.

China's Ministry of Education issued an Al Education Guide for Primary and Secondary Schools. This
guide defines four key areas of Al literacy: cognition, skills, thinking, and values. For each of these areas,
the framework outside goals for primary, junior high, and senior high students.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 207
Example Goals

Skills

Goal for primary students: Develop basic

Al skills by using simple tools, visual
programming, and practicing data handling.
Goal for junior high students: Apply Al to real-
world problems through project-based learning
and building simple intelligent agents.

Goal for senior high students: Focus on
innovative Al use by building simple models
and creating interdisciplinary solutions with
intelligent tools.

Values

Goal for primary students: Deepen

ethical understanding by recognizing Al's
strategic role in innovation and evaluating
misinformation risks in generative
technologies.

Goal for junior high students: Deepen ethical
awareness by recognizing Al's strategic value
and evaluating risks like misinformation in
generative applications.

Goal for senior high students: Promote social

responsibility by examining Al sovereignty
within national tech strategies and balancing
innovation with ethical risks.

Uruguay's Reference Framework for Teaching Artificial Intelligence aims to build students’ Al literacy
and computational thinking skills; encourage critical, creative, and ethical engagement with Al; and
prepare students to understand, use, and create Al systems responsibly and thoughtfully. The framework
outlines six core principles that should underpin all Al learning activities: equity, collaboration, creativity,
autonomy, critical perspective, and active methodologies. Pedagogically, the framework is organized into
five dimensions:

* What is Al?

+ Representation of knowledge

* Computational learning

« Computational approach with Al
« Ethical use and social impact

This model views Al literacy as a multidisciplinary topic, and encourages combining computing, ethics,
and social sciences. It also encourages project-based learning, having students learn real examples of Al
use and doing hands-on experimentation with Al tools.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 208

Example learning goals for each Al literacy dimension

Representation
of knowledge
« Identify sensors and

Computational

approach with Al

¢ Identify real-world
data sources problems suitable for

« Understand how data Al solutions
representation influences ¢ Apply Al tools for

Al behavior analysis, prediction, or
© Critically analyze creative tasks
Al outputs and « Evaluate Al's strengths

potential errors and weaknesses

Ethical use and
social impact
« Identify positive

and negative social
impacts of Al

Recognize bias in data
and algorithmic decisions
Imagine future
applications and discuss
their societal implications

The Day of Al curriculum was developed at MIT in 2021 to prepare K-12 students to be successful,
responsible, and engaged in an Al world. This curriculum provides free resources full of hands-on Al
literacy lessons accompanied by professional development for teachers. The curriculum has been taught
in all 50 U.S. states and over 110 countries. For example, in August 2025, Rwanda's Ministry of Education
and the Rwandan Education Board hosted a four-day national training for 150 master teachers on the Day
of Al curriculum. This curriculum is organized by three themes: Al literacy foundations, Al applications,
and going beyond Al literacy. For each theme, the curriculum provides units for students aged 4-7, 8-10,

11-13, and 14+.

Example Units in the Day of Al Curriculum

Al literacy foundations Al applications

¢ Al for early elementary ¢ Using Al for creativity
(ages 4-7) (ages 4-7)

« What is Al? (ages 8+) e Aland the creative

« How do machines arts (ages 8+)
learn? (ages 8+) e ChatGPT in schools

« How do machines create? (ages 11+)

(ages 11+)
« Aland ethics materials
(ages 11+)

How do Al tools affect our
tights? (ages 11+)

Al legislation in schools:
empowering young
educators (ages 11+)
Understanding Al in social
media (ages 11+)

The brain behind the

bot: chatbots, bias, and
productive uses of Al for
kids (ages 12+)

Going beyond Al literacy

Al programming courses
with blocks (ages 8+)
How are we quantified by
Al? (ages 14+)

Al programming courses
with Python (ages 14+)
Careers in Al (ages 14+)
Making sense of our
surroundings (ages 14+)

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

209

ANNEX B:

Acknowledgements

We extend our deepest gratitude to the global community whose engagement made this study possible.
Teachers, students, parents, education and technology experts, leaders, and others from around the world
generously shared their time, insights, and experiences, enriching our work with diverse perspectives.

STEERING COMMITTEE

Armand Doucet
Former Senior Advisor for Artificial Intelligence in
Education, Government of New Brunswick, Canada

Armando Estrada Zubia
Cofounder and Executive Director, Via
Educacion, Mexico

Bassem Sa’ad

Chief Executive Officer, Queen Raina Foundation
for Education and Development; Former European
Relations Senior Officer, Ministry of Planning and
International Cooperation, Jordan

Benjamin Piper
Director of Global Education Program, Gates
Foundation

Carolina Piferos
Executive Director, Red PaPaz, Colombia

Chernor Bah
Minister of Information and Civic Education,
Government of Sierra Leone

Claudia Costin
President, Salto Institute; Former Secretary of
Education, Rio de Janeiro City Hall, Brazil

Cristébal Cobo
Senior Education and Technology Policy Expert,
World Bank

David Edwards
General Secretary, Education International

Denis Mizne
Chief Executive Officer, Lemann Foundation, Brazil

Femi Longe
Global Bitcoin Lead, Human Rights Foundation

Fengchun Miao

Former Chief of the Unit for Technology and

Al in Education, UNESCO; Former Director,
National Center for ICT in Education, Ministry of
Education, China

Frank van Cappelle
Head of the Office of Innovation, UNICEF

George Papandreou

General Rapporteur on Democracy, Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly; Former Prime
Minister of Greece

Glenn M. Kleiman
Senior Advisor, Stanford Accelerator for
Learning, U.S.

Isabelle Hau
Executive Director, Stanford Accelerator for
Learning, U.S.

Jean-Claude Brizard
President and CEO, Digital Promise, U.S.

Jim Knight
Member, House of Lords; Former Minister of State
for Schools, UK

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 210
Jon Valant
Senior Fellow and Director of the Brown Center on
Education Policy, Brookings Institution, U.S.

Jordan Shapiro
Associate Professor, Temple University, U.S.

Juan-Pablo Giraldo
Education and Innovation Specialist, UNICEF

Leandro Folgar Ruétalo

Vice President of Innovation, Universidad Catdlica
del Uruguay; Former President, Fundacion

Ceibal, Uruguay

Michael Trucano
Non-Resident Fellow, Brookings Institution, U.S.

Olli-Pekka Heinonen

Director General, International Baccalaureate;
Former Director General of the Finnish National
Agency for Education, Finland

Pat Yongpradit
Chief Academic Officer, Code.org; Lead,
TeachAl, U.S.

Pati Ruiz
Director of Learning Technology Research, Digital
Promise, U.S.

Punya Mishra

Professor and Director of Innovative Learning
Futures at the Learning Engineering Institute, Mary
Lou Fulton College of Teaching and Learning
Innovation, Arizona State University, U.S.

Sara Ruto

Program Officer, Echidna Giving; Former
Chief Administrative Secretary, Ministry of
Education, Kenya

Shabana Basij-Rasikh
Cofounder and President, School of Leadership,
Afghanistan

Shafika Isaacs
Chief of Section, Technology and Al in
Education, UNESCO

Shaveta Sharma-Kukreja
Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director,
Central Square Foundation, India

Stéphan Vincent-Lancrin
Deputy Head of Division and Senior Economist and
Analyst, OECD

Urvashi Sahni
Founder, President, and Chief Executive Officer,
Study Hall Educational Foundation, India

Verna Lalbeharie

Executive Director, EdTech Hub; Former Director of
Digital Teaching and Learning for the North Carolina
Department of Public Instruction, U.S.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 211
STUDY PARTICIPANTS

We are incredibly grateful to our resource experts, Delphi panelists, focus group participants, consultation
participants, and interview participants, who dedicated their time and shared their experience with

our team. The following list includes the study participants who gave us permission to recognize their
contributions. We are deeply grateful to all other study participants not listed, including the students we
interviewed, none of whom are listed here to protect their identity.

Abby David

Adesina
Oluwatosin Israel

Adewale Orebanwo
Adjei Claudia
Adriano de Sousa Sa
Alan Al Ahmad

Alex Gerardo
Hernandez Silva

Alireza Alidoust
Amina Yekhlef
Amokelo Maweya
Ana Maria Raad
Anitha A

Anjum Ara

Ann Obieje

Ann O'Keefe
Armand Doucet
Asli Karabenli

Audaci Maria de
Lima Silva

Barbara Treacy

Barry Cottam-Howarth
Billy Baum

Bonginkosi Ntsome
Brian Adams

Carla Aerts

Carolina Augustina
Vasquez de Estraver

Carol Yu
Celine Perea
Charles Fadel
Chernor Bah

Chiamaka
Martha Nkwuenu

Christin Monroe
Chris Ludwig

Clarissa Paz
de Menezes

Cloé Ward
Connor Akers

Corrine Cross

Cosmas Kamwendo
Craig Findlay

Cristine Legare

Dalila Maite Rosa Sena
Dana Suskind

Daniel Barcay

Daniela
Cardoso da Silva

Danny Martinez
Dave Smith

David Castafeda
David Hay

David Monahan
David Montagu
Delphine Le Serre
Dinu Raheja

Drew Edwards

Dyone Souza
de Andrade

Edison Muyala

Elham Tabassi

Elisabeth O'Bryon
Elizangela de
Nazaré Cardoso
Damasceno
Emmanuel Larbi
Enrique Lemitton
Eric Anctil

Eric Hudson

Felipe Andrés
Contreras Bravo

Felix Dzanku
Francesca Mazzieri
Francilda Fonseca
Gandonu Temitope
George Mutale
Giancarlo Brotto
Gita Luz

Glenn M. Kleiman
Gouri Gupta
Gurpreet Kaur Arora

Hakeoung Hannah Lee

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

212
Harsha Makan
Henré Benson

Henry Kofi
Rockson Junior

Heo Young Joo
Imogen Casebourne

Isabel Anabela
Vergara Angulo

Jacqueline da Silva
Santos Batista

Jade Ackers

James Basham

Jara Medina

Jen Scott

Jeremy Goldstein
Jim Knight

Jody Britten

Jordan Wallace-Wolf
Joseph Smith

Joy Amarachi Ifeanyi
Julian Fraillon

Justin Kirby

Karen Murphy
Kathleen Doyle

Kathy Hirsh-Pasek

Kavya M
Kevin Martin
Khuteja Bi
Kim Min Joo
Lance Eaton
Larry Molinaro
Lauren Paer

Lawal
Ibironke Remilekun

Lawrell Munsami
Léonie Aubut

Leticia Matia de
Souza Cortes

Lindsay Dombrowski
Linice Sanga
Luke Stannard

Madinkgoana
Mirriam Msiza

Manuel Arthur Gil Jara
Margaret LaRaia

Maria Carmen
Romero Monzoén

Maria Claudia
Uribe Salazar

Marianela Alejandra
Vergaalera Cortés

Marie-Laure Pokou

Marjana Skenduli
Matt McGuire
Matt Pulley

Matt Strikwerda
Matthew Jessop
Mehar Sultana
Micah Stickler
Micheal Bamidele
Michael Harvey
Michael McNabb
Michael Serazio
Michael Sullivan
Michael Trucano
Milos Jeremi¢
Mogomotsi Molefi
Mokgadi Obakeng
Monica Gagnon

Monica Genoveva
Lesama Matute

Monique Arsenault
Nadia Abdallah
Nadine Leblanc
Najlah Al Bin Ali

Natalia Edisherashvili

Natalie Johnson
Natasha Armstrong
Nazareen Ebrahim
Nazia

Neha Yadav
Nelson Lasso Chiro

Neuza Sofia
Guerreiro Pedro

Nidhi Singh
Nkosilathi Dube
Nomsa Daka

Nupke Sunu
Xorlanya Akosua

Ogunmoroti Ayodeji O.
Omashani Naidoo
Osondu Uchechukwu L
Otodei Nii Odoi Joseph
Park Hye Ran

Pati Ruiz

Patience Ogechi Agonsi

Patricia Jacoba Saénez
Lopez Torres

Peter Rafferty
Philip McRae

Pilar Quezzaire

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

213
Poonam Dixit
Poppy Ngidi
Quintres Sefala
Rachel Romeo
Rachel Urquhart
Radhika Yadav
Rafael Parente
Rafael Rebelo
Ragini Upadhyay
Rapelang Rabana
Richard Kingleza
Rida Karim

Rivaldo Bevenuto de
Oliveira Neto

Robin Street

Rod Scott

Roshaan Suren

Ross Hall

Ryan Layton

Sabba Quidwai

Sacha van Straten

Sadia Zia

Saeed Ullah Khan

Sam Scott

Samantha Skelton

Sara Ratner

Sara Ruto

Sarika Sharma
Seidu El-Ham
Sergio Lance Somerville
Shamsiya

Sheeba A

Shirley King

Simon Collier
Simone Natale
Simran Mulchandani
Sizwe Zulu

Sonu M

Sonya Hull

Sophie Elliott

Stephen Manchisi
Suman Singh
Sumithra

Sydney Munsterman
Syeda Amina
Thomas Thompson
Tracey Bryan
Vanessa Lusa
Vincent Sakwata
Vriti Saraf

Wayan Vota

Yishay Mor

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

214
17 ROOMS INITIATIVE

We are also grateful to the participants of Room 4 (Quality Education) in the 17 Rooms initiative convened
by Brookings and the Rockefeller Foundation. Their insights and discussion helped us advance our
thinking on generative Al and students’ experiences. We offer deep gratitude to those listed below, whose
diverse contributions helped make this report possible.

Aria Finger
Ben Gomes
Dan Carroll

Denis Mizne

Drew Bent

Ellen Pack

Jacob Taylor

James Slavet

OUR TEAM AND COLLABORATORS

Kershlin Krishna
Lilach Mollick
Pat Yongpradit

Philip McRae

Stephen Jull

Vibhu Mittal

We offer deep gratitude to those listed below. Their diverse contributions helped make this report possible.

Ashleigh Ekwenugo
Annick Arsenault-Carter
Chinenye Agwuncha
Dayse Oliveira

Elham Tabassi

Emily Morris

Gaia Bernstein

Hans Cabra

Humyra Karim

Izzy Taylor

Jayant Gauri
Jennifer O'Donoghue
Joel Mitchell

John M. Costello
Joysy John MBE

Lawrencia Owusu

Linice Sanga

Marian Licheri Hougaard
Mashhood Bhat

Michael Maffie

Nina Ng

Nova Escola (institution)

Ogulkeyik
Hudayberdiyeva

Park Kiwoong
Pooja Sharma
Punya Mishra
Samarth Shukla
Steve McDonald
Surabhi Yelsangikar

Valeria Duarte

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

215
ANNEX C:
Research methods

This research is grounded in the concept of a premortem. A premortem is a strategic planning exercise
that anticipates potential failures before implementing an innovation. Unlike a postmortem, which
examines failure after occurrence, a premortem assumes failure has already occurred and works
backward to identify the causes of failure (Burns and Winthrop 2025). Premortems have two main
benefits: first, they reduce overconfidence, which emerges when teams with shared goals construct
favorable narratives about their initiatives, creating a self-reinforcing cycle where contradictory
information is dismissed and confidence becomes increasingly divorced from reality (Veinott et al. 2010).
Secondly, premortems also eliminate social desirability bias by creating structured opportunities for honest
critique, overcoming the natural reluctance to express skepticism about promised benefits (Science Direct
2025). This dual function generates higher-quality information and more accurate risk assessments,
ultimately enhancing innovation outcomes through more realistic evaluation processes (Klein 2021).

RESEARCH QUESTIONS

+ What are the potential negative risks that generative Al poses to the education of children and youth?
« Assuming these potential risks, what can we begin to do now to prevent them and maximize the
potential benefits of Al?

METHODOLOGY

Our primary methods for investigating these research questions included: conducting a literature review,
conducting qualitative research via focus groups and group interviews, and verifying our data through a
Delphi Panel and education stakeholder consultations.

LITERATURE REVIEW

Guided by the two research questions and to better situate study participants’ experiences within a
theoretical context, we conducted an extensive review of studies on Al in education published after
November 2022. Given the nascent state of this field, the rapid pace of Al development, and the scarcity
of experimental and longitudinal research, the review adopted a pragmatic approach, also incorporating
preliminary findings and smaller-scale investigations, policy documents, essays, and case studies.
Researchers also accessed news reports on Al in education, Al thought pieces from other disciplines, and
essays by respected Al in education leaders. In total, we reviewed over 425 articles, using these insights
to inform our analysis and findings.

INITIAL DATA COLLECTION

Focus groups (N = 72): This was conducted primarily with education experts—those working in the field
of Al in education, university researchers, and those associated with governments, businesses, and
NGOs. Within this report, they are referred to as “experts.”

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 216
Focus groups were conducted over two sessions, with session one focused on the first research
question (potential negative risks of Al) and session two focused on addressing these risks and
harnessing benefits.

Group interviews (N = 226): Interviews were conducted with 117 teachers, 68 students, and 41 parents.
Interview questions focused on four questions: Al's uses in education, its benefits, its risks, and what to do
about these risks. Interviews were one hour in length.

All data were coded and analyzed, and themes were developed using qualitative research software.
Quotes from experts, teachers, parents, and students can be found throughout this report.

VERIFYING THE DATA

Delphi panel (N = 21): For questions that appeared to have no definitive answers—for example, questions
around Al adoption, promoting agency, and rethinking the purpose of education in an Al world, we
deployed a Delphi panel, a structured, anonymous, iterative approach that harnesses the collective
wisdom of a group of experts. The observations of the Delphi panel are integrated throughout this report,
particularly in Section VI.

Consultations (N = 232): We conducted consultations with a wide variety of stakeholders to inform
each stage of the research process: getting feedback on the methodology, stress testing data collection
instruments, surfacing gaps in preliminary findings, and final data analysis. The participants in these
consultations ranged from high-level decisionmakers (including those on the task force steering
committee) to funders and practitioners such as ed-tech leaders, nongovernmental organization
representatives, child development specialists, learning scientists, and technologists. Included in these
consultations were four task force meetings with steering committee members who engaged in guidance
and feedback on the study from September 2024 to October 2025.

In total, our team engaged with 505 unique participants across the initial data collection and data
verification phases. Some individuals took part in both phases, which is why the combined count
exceeds 505.

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT 217
COUNTRIES

The study was global in scope, and we drew on a wide range of literature available, primarily in English.
Study participants—those participating in either focus groups, group interviews, the Delphi panel, or
consultations—were from the 50 countries listed below:

1.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Afghanistan
Albania
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia

Finland

14. France

15. Germany
16. Ghana

17. Greece

18. Hong Kong
19. Indonesia
20.India

21. Israel

22. Italy

23. Jordan
24.Kenya
25.Kingdom of Bahrain

26.Malawi

27. Malaysia
28.Mexico
29.Netherlands
30.Nigeria

31. Pakistan
32.Paraguay
33.Peru
34.Portugal
35.Romania

36. Saudi Arabia
37. Serbia
38.Sierra Leone

39.Singapore

40.South Africa

4‘. South Korea
42.Spain

43.Taiwan

44.Thailand

45.Tunisia

46.United Arab Emirates
47. United Kingdom
48.United States
49.Uruguay

50.Zambia

A NEW DIRECTION FOR STUDENTS IN AN Al WORLD: PROSPER, PREPARE, PROTECT

218
BROOKINGS

©The Brookings Institution, January 2026. All Rights Reserved.
